Contemporary Reviews in Cardiovascular Medicine
E-Cigarettes
A Scientific Review
Rachel Grana, PhD, MPH; Neal Benowitz, MD; Stanton A. Glantz, PhD
Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) are products that deliver impacts on prevention and cessation and the undermining of
a nicotine-containing aerosol (commonly called vapor) to existing tobacco control measures, e-cigarette use should be
users by heating a solution typically made up of propylene prohibited where tobacco cigarette use is prohibited, and the
glycol or glycerol (glycerin), nicotine, and flavoring agents products should be subject to the same marketing restrictions
(Figure 1) invented in their current form by Chinese pharma- as tobacco cigarettes.
cist Hon Lik in the early 2000s.1 The US patent application
describes the e-cigarette device as “an electronic atomization Methods
cigarette that functions as substitutes [sic] for quitting smok- Initial searches conducted via PubMed using the key words elec-
ing and cigarette substitutes” (patent No. 8,490,628 B2). By tronic cigarette, e-cigarette, and electronic nicotine delivery systems
2013, the major multinational tobacco companies had entered yielded 151 studies (Figure 2). Seventy-one articles presented origi-
nal data and were included. Eighty articles were excluded because
the e-cigarette market. E-cigarettes are marketed via televi-
they were not relevant, were not in English, or were reviews or com-
sion, the Internet, and print advertisements (that often feature
mentaries that did not provide original data, although some are cited
celebrities)2 as healthier alternatives to tobacco smoking, as for background and context. Searches using the same search terms
useful for quitting smoking and reducing cigarette consump- were conducted using World Health Organization regional databases;
tion, and as a way to circumvent smoke-free laws by enabling only BIBLIOTECA Virtual em Salude Latin America and Caribbean
included relevant papers, all of which had already been located with
users to “smoke anywhere.”3
PubMed. Working with the World Health Organization, we also con-
There has been rapid market penetration of e-cigarettes
tacted investigators to locate other studies, some of which had not yet
despite many unanswered questions about their safety, effi- been published (submitted or in press). We also reviewed technical
cacy for harm reduction and cessation, and total impact on reports prepared by health organizations,12–15 news articles, and rel-
public health. E-cigarette products are changing quickly, and evant Web sites. The results of these searches were used to prepare
a report commissioned by the World Health Organization Tobacco
many of the findings from studies of older products may not
Free Initiative, which provides details of individual studies, including
be relevant to the assessment of newer products that could
some studies that are not discussed in this article because of length
be safer and more effective as nicotine delivery devices. In constraints.1 After the manuscript was submitted for peer review, 5
addition, marketing and other environmental influences may more articles became available, resulting in a total of 82 articles form-
vary from country to country, so patterns of use and the ulti- ing the basis for this review.
mate impact on public health may differ. The individual risks
and benefits and the total impact of these products occur in The Product
the context of the widespread and continuing availability E-cigarette devices are manufactured mainly in China. As
of conventional cigarettes and other tobacco products, with of late 2013, there was wide variability in e-cigarette prod-
high levels of dual use of e-cigarettes and conventional ciga- uct engineering, including varying nicotine concentrations
rettes at the same time among adults4–8 and youth.9–11 It is in the solution used to generate the nicotine aerosol (also
important to assess e-cigarette toxicant exposure and indi- called e-liquid), varying volumes of solution in the product,
vidual risk, as well as the health effects, of e-cigarettes as different carrier compounds (most commonly propylene
they are actually used to ensure safety and to develop an glycol with or without glycerol [glycerin]), a wide range of
evidence-based regulatory scheme that protects the entire additives and flavors, and battery voltage. Quality control
population—children and adults, smokers and nonsmok- is variable,16 and users can modify many of the products,
ers—in the context of how the tobacco industry is marketing including using them to deliver other drugs such as mari-
and promoting these products. Health claims and claims of juana.17,18 These engineering differences result in variability
efficacy for quitting smoking are unsupported by the scien- in how e-cigarettes heat and convert the nicotine solution to
tific evidence to date. To minimize the potential negative an aerosol and consequently the levels of nicotine and other
From the Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education (R.G., N.B., S.A.G.) and Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular Research Institute
(N.B., S.A.G.), University of California, San Francisco.
Correspondence to Stanton A. Glantz, PhD, Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education, University of California, San Francisco, 530 Parnassus
Ave, No. 366, San Francisco, CA 94143-1390. E-mail glantz@medicine.ucsf.edu
(Circulation. 2014;129:1972-1986.)
© 2014 The Authors. Circulation is published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wolters Kluwer. This is an open access article under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial-NoDervis License, which permits use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided that the Contribution is properly cited, the use is non-commercial, and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.007667
1972Grana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1973
Figure 1. Examples of different electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) products. Reproduced from Grana et al.1
chemicals delivered to users and the air pollution generated water vapor.” Similar messaging strategies were being
by the exhaled aerosol.19 used in the United Kingdom.22
E-liquids are flavored, including tobacco, menthol, coffee, These marketing messages have been repeated in the media.
fruit, candy, and alcohol flavors, as well as unusual flavors A thematic analysis of newspaper and online media cover-
such as cola and Belgian waffle.3 Flavored (conventional) age about e-cigarettes in the United Kingdom and Scotland
tobacco products are used disproportionately by youth and from July 2007 to June 2012 found 5 themes: healthier
initiators,20 and cigarettes with characterizing flavors (except choice, circumventing smoke-free restrictions, celebrity use,
menthol) have been banned in the United States. price, and risk and uncertainty.23 Coverage often included
anecdotes about having tried nicotine replacement therapies
Marketing and Media Research (NRTs), failing to quit, and then trying the e-cigarette (such
Consumer perceptions of the risks and benefits and deci- as the celebrity endorsement by actress Katherine Heigl on
sions to use e-cigarettes are heavily influenced by how the US David Letterman television program21), implying that
they are marketed. Celebrities have been used to mar- e-cigarettes are a more effective form of NRT.
ket e-cigarettes since at least 2009.21 Grana and Ling3 E-cigarette companies also have a strong presence in social
reviewed 59 single-brand e-cigarette retail Web sites in media, which reinforces their marketing messages, including
2012 and found that the most popular claims were that the repeating the use of celebrity endorsements (eg, Heigl) and
products are healthier (95%), cheaper (93%), and cleaner spreading images of the UK musical group Girls Aloud “puff-
(95%) than cigarettes; can be smoked anywhere (88%); ing on e-cigarettes to cope with the stress of their 10th anni-
can be used to circumvent smoke-free policies (71%); do versary tour.”22
not produce secondhand smoke (76%); and are modern Cigarette and other tobacco companies have been unable to
(73%). Health claims made through text and pictorial and market their products on television and radio since the 1970s.
video representations of doctors were present on 22% of E-cigarette advertising on television and radio is mass market-
sites. Cessation-related claims (direct and indirect state- ing of an addictive nicotine product for use in a recreational
ments) were found on 64% of sites. Marketing on the sites manner to new generations who have never experienced such
commonly stated that e-cigarettes produce only “harmless marketing. In an online convenience sample of 519 adult1974 Circulation May 13, 2014
Figure 2. Studies screened and selected for inclusion. PRISMA indicates Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses.
smokers and recent quitters who viewed a television com- the former smokers using e-cigarettes daily at baseline were
mercial for Blu e-cigarettes, 76% of current smokers reported still using e-cigarettes daily at follow-up. Among 36 dual
that the ad made them think about smoking cigarettes, 74% users at baseline, 16 (44%) had stopped smoking after 1 year.
reported it made them think about quitting, and 66% said it The epidemiological, population-based studies indicate that,
made them likely to try an e-cigarette in the future.24 The 34% across countries, e-cigarettes are most commonly being used
of participants who had used e-cigarettes were significantly concurrently with conventional tobacco cigarettes (dual use).
more likely to think about smoking cigarettes after viewing Consistent with marketing messages, the most common rea-
the ad than nonusers (83% and 72%, respectively), suggesting sons given for trying e-cigarettes are for use in places where
that viewing an e-cigarette commercial may induce thoughts smoking is restricted, to cut down on smoking, and for help
about smoking and cue the urge to smoke.24 with quitting smoking.6,27–30
Choi and Forster31 followed up a cohort of Midwestern
Prevalence young adults (mean age, 24.1 years) who had never used e-cig-
Awareness of e-cigarettes and e-cigarette trial have at least arettes from 2010 to 2011 and found that 21.6% of baseline
doubled among both adults and adolescents in several coun- current smokers, 11.9% of baseline former smokers, and 2.9%
tries from 2008 to 2012. In the United States, awareness of baseline nonsmokers reported having ever used e-cigarettes
is more prevalent among men, but trying e-cigarettes is at follow-up. Those who believed at baseline that e-cigarettes
more prevalent among women. Almost the same percent of could help with quitting smoking and perceived e-cigarettes
European Union and US adult respondents to national sur- to be less harmful than cigarettes were more likely to report
veys reported having tried e-cigarettes (7% in 2012 versus experimenting with e-cigarettes at follow-up (adjusted odds
6.2% in 2011, respectively).5,25 All population-based studies ratio [OR], 1.98; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.29–3.04; and
of adult use show the highest rate of e-cigarette use among adjusted OR, 2.34; 95% CI, 1.49–3.69, respectively).
current smokers, followed by former smokers, with little use Data on e-cigarette use among adolescents are more lim-
among nonsmokers, although e-cigarette trial and use rose ited but, like for adults, show rapid increases in awareness and
in all of these categories.4–6 Etter and Bullen26 followed up a use in 5 countries (United States, Poland, Latvia, Finland, and
sample of e-cigarette users recruited from Web sites dedicated Korea), with higher rates of trial and current use in European
to e-cigarettes and smoking cessation, most (72%) of whom countries than the United States or Korea.9,10,32,33 In Korea,
were former smokers at baseline. At the 1-year follow up, 6% youth ever use of e-cigarettes rose from 0.5% in 2008 to 9.4%
of former smokers who were daily e-cigarette users at base- in 2011,10 and in the United States, it rose from 3.3% in 2011
line relapsed to smoking cigarettes, and almost all (92%) of to 6.8% in 2012.9 As with adult population-based studies, dataGrana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1975
suggest that e-cigarette use is most appealing and prevalent resulting aerosol, indicating differences in the engineering
among youth who are also experimenting with or are current characteristics of the device that strongly influence nicotine
users of tobacco cigarettes. Dual use with conventional ciga- delivery even with a consistent puffing protocol.40
rettes is the predominant pattern of e-cigarette use: 61% in US Goniewicz et al41 analyzed the aerosol from 12 brands of
middle school students and 80% among US high school stu- e-cigarettes, a conventional cigarette, and a nicotine inhaler for
dents in 2011.9 These results indicate rapid market penetration toxic and carcinogenic compounds. The levels of toxicants in
of e-cigarettes among youth, with trial among US high school the aerosol were 1 to 2 orders of magnitude lower than in ciga-
students (10.0%) in 2012 even higher than the 2011 rate for rette smoke but higher than with a nicotine inhaler (Table 1).
adults (6.2%).5 Despite a law prohibiting e-cigarette sales to Kim and Shin42 analyzed the tobacco-specific nitrosamines
minors, e-cigarette use among Utah youth (grades 8, 10, and NNN, NNK, and NAT and total tobacco-specific nitrosa-
12) tripled between 2011 and 2013, with youth 3 times more mines in 105 refill fluids from 11 companies in the Korean
likely to report current e-cigarette use than adults.34 market and found nearly a 3-order-of-magnitude variation
Although dual use with cigarettes is high, some youth exper- in tobacco-specific nitrosamine concentrations, with total
imenting with e-cigarettes have never tried a tobacco cigarette, tobacco-specific nitrosamine concentration ranging from 330
which indicates that some youth are initiating use of nicotine, to 8600 μg/mL.
an addictive drug, with e-cigarettes. In 2012, 20.3% of middle
school and 7.2% of high school ever e-cigarette users reported Cytotoxicity
never smoking conventional cigarettes.9 Similarly, in 2011 in Bahl et al43 screened 41 e-cigarette refill fluids from 4 com-
Korea, 15% of students in grades 7 through 12 who had ever panies for cytotoxicity using 3 cell types: human pulmonary
used e-cigarettes had never smoked a cigarette.10 The Utah fibroblasts, human embryonic stem cells, and mouse neural
Department of Health found that 32% of ever e-cigarette users stem cells. Cytotoxicity varied among products from highly
reported that they had never smoked conventional cigarettes.34 toxic to low or no cytotoxicity. The authors determined that
nicotine did not cause cytotoxicity, that some products were
noncytotoxic to pulmonary fibroblasts but cytotoxic to both
E-Cigarette E-Fluid and Vapor
types of stem cells, and that cytotoxicity was related to the
Chemical Constituents concentration and number of flavorings used. The finding
The nicotine content of the cartridge e-liquid from some that the stem cells are more sensitive than the differentiated
brands revealed poor concordance of labeled and actual nico- adult pulmonary fibroblasts cells suggests that adult lungs are
tine content.35–39 Simulated e-cigarette use revealed that indi- probably not the most sensitive system to assess the effects
vidual puffs contained from 0 to 35 μg nicotine per puff.37 of exposure to e-cigarette aerosol. These findings also raise
Assuming a high nicotine delivery of 30 μg per puff, it concerns about pregnant women who use e-cigarettes or are
would take ≈30 puffs to deliver the 1 mg nicotine typically exposed to secondhand e-cigarette aerosol.
delivered by smoking a conventional cigarette. A puff of the In a study funded by the FlavorArt e-cigarette liquid man-
e-cigarette with the highest nicotine content contained 20% of ufacturers, Romagna et al44 compared the cytotoxicity of
the nicotine contained in a puff of a conventional cigarette.37 aerosol produced from 21 nicotine-containing, flavored (12
Actual nicotine delivery from an e-cigarette would likely tobacco flavored and 9 fruit or candied flavored) brands of
be affected by users’ smoking behavior. An analysis of UK e-cigarette liquid with smoke from a conventional cigarette
brand e-cigarettes and the resulting aerosol demonstrated that, using embryonic mouse fibroblast cells. Only aerosol from
across brands, nicotine content of the e-liquid in the cartridges coffee-flavored e-liquid produced a cytotoxic effect (average,
was not significantly correlated with the amount found in the 51% viability at 100% concentration of solution).
Table 1. Levels of Toxicants in E-Cigarette Aerosol Compared With Nicotine Inhaler and Cigarette Smoke
Range in Content in Aerosol Range in Content in Conventional Content in Nicotine
From 12 E-Cigarette Cigarette Micrograms in Mainstream Inhaler Mist
Toxicant Samples per 15 Puffs* Smoke From 1 Cigarette per 15 Puffs*
Formaldehyde, μg 0.2–5.61 1.6–52 0.2
Acetaldehyde, μg 0.11–1.36 52–140 0.11
Acrolein, μg 0.07–4.19 2.4–62 ND
o-Methylbenzaldehyde, μg 0.13–0.71 … 0.07
Toluene, μg ND–0.63 8.3–70 ND
p,m-xylene, μg ND–0.2 … ND
NNN, ng ND–0.00043 0.0005–0.19 ND
NNK, ng ND–0.00283 0.012–0.11 ND
Cadmium, ng ND–0.022 … 0.003
Nickel, ng 0.011–0.029 … 0.019
Lead, ng 0.003–0.057 … 0.004
Prepared using data from Goniewicz et al.41 E-cigarette indicates electronic cigarette; and ND, not determined.1976 Circulation May 13, 2014
Farsalinos et al45 tested cytotoxicity in cultured rat cardiac aerosol was not a source of exposure to carbon monoxide, a
myoblasts of exposure to aerosol generated from 20 refill key combustion element of conventional cigarette smoke.
solutions from 5 manufacturers containing 6 to 24 mg/mL
nicotine in various flavors, a “base”-only solution (50% pro- Particulate Matter
pylene glycol and 50% glycerol), and conventional cigarette E-cigarettes deliver nicotine by creating an aerosol of ultra-
smoke. The aerosol from 3 fluids was cytotoxic at 100% and fine particles. Fine particles can be variable and chemically
50% dilution; 2 were tobacco flavored and 1 was cinnamon complex, and the specific components responsible for toxic-
cookie flavored. Cigarette smoke was cytotoxic at 100% and ity and the relative importance of particle size and particle
all dilutions except 6.25%. composition are generally not known.50 Given these uncer-
tainties, it is not clear whether the ultrafine particles deliv-
Secondhand Exposure ered by e-cigarettes have health effects and toxicity similar to
E-cigarettes do not burn or smolder the way conventional cig- the ambient fine particles generated by conventional cigarette
arettes do, so they do not emit side-stream smoke; however, smoke or secondhand smoke. There is strong evidence, how-
bystanders are exposed to aerosol exhaled by the user. Schripp ever, that frequent low or short-term levels of exposure to fine
et al46 conducted chamber studies in which subjects used 3 and ultrafine particles from tobacco smoke or air pollution can
e-liquids (0 mg nicotine, apple flavor; 18 mg nicotine, apple contribute to pulmonary and systemic inflammatory processes
flavor; 18 mg nicotine, tobacco flavor) and 1 tobacco ciga- and increase the risk of cardiovascular and respiratory disease
rette and measured levels of several toxins and nicotine in the and death.51–54
resulting aerosol. Three e-cigarette devices were used for these Fuoco et al55 examined particle number concentration
experiments: 2 that used a tank system that is directly filled and distribution and performed a volatility analysis of the
with e-liquid and one that used a cartridge with a cotton fiber e-cigarette aerosol generated from 3 devices (2 rechargeable
on which to drip the liquid. They found low levels of form- and 1 disposable) using 4 refill e-liquids with varying levels
aldehyde, acetaldehyde, isoprene, acetic acid, 2 -butanodione, of nicotine and flavorants. They found that higher e-liquid
acetone, propanol, propylene glycol, and diacetin (from flavor- nicotine content was associated with higher particle numbers
ing), traces of apple oil (3- methylbutyl-3-methylbutanoate), in the resulting aerosol, with little effect on the particle size
and nicotine (with differing levels depending on the specific distribution. Longer puffing time resulted in more particles.
protocols) emitted into the air. Toxins in the e-cigarette aero- Flavor was not associated with differences in particle num-
sol were at much lower levels compared with the conventional ber or size distribution. Consistent with other studies,46,56–58
cigarette emissions.46 the particle size distribution (range of modes, ≈120–165 nm)
In another chamber study, Flouris et al47 compared emis- was similar to that of conventional cigarettes, with some
sions of conventional cigarettes and e-cigarettes in condi- e-cigarettes delivering more particles than conventional ciga-
tions designed to approximate a smoky bar (target air CO of rettes (Figure 3).
23 ppm) using machine-smoked e-cigarettes and cigarettes. Zhang et al57 examined the size of e-cigarette aerosol par-
E-cigarette aerosol (using a single brand of e-cigarette made ticles and likely deposition in the human body (using a single
in Greece and a single e-liquid with at least 60% propylene brand, BloogMaxXFusion) with both propylene glycol and
glycol, 11 mg/mL nicotine) was generated with a pump that vegetable glycerin-based liquids. Using particle size and lung
operated for the same duration as the cigarette smoking, and ventilation rates (1 for a “reference worker” and 1 for a “heavy
aerosol was released into the room. (A person inhaling a nico- worker”: 1.2 and 1.688 m3/h, respectively), their human depo-
tine aerosol usually absorbs 80% of the nicotine,48 whereas sition model estimated that 73% to 80% of particles would
the pump discharges all nicotine into the environment, so the be distributed into the exhaled aerosol, whereas 9% to 18%
nicotine exposure may be higher in this study than would be of particles would be deposited in alveoli resulting in arterial
the case with actual secondhand aerosol exposure.) Serum delivery, and 9% to 17% would be deposited in the head and
cotinine in nonsmokers sitting in the chamber was similar for airways, resulting in venous delivery. As expected, the heavy
cigarette smoke and e-cigarette aerosol exposure (average, worker model showed more alveolar delivery across puffs
0.8 ng/mL for tobacco cigarette and 0.5 ng/mL for e-cigarette). compared with the reference worker, who would have more
Schober et al39 measured indoor pollution from 3 people head and airway delivery. In total, ≈20% to 27% of particles
using e-cigarettes over a 2-hour period in a realistic envi- are estimated to be deposited in the circulatory system and
ronment modeled on a café. They found elevated nicotine, into organs from e-cigarette aerosol, which is comparable to
1,2-propanediol, glycerin, aluminum, and 7 polycyclic aro- the 25% to 35% for conventional cigarette smoke.
matic hydrocarbons classified as probable carcinogens by the In their study of passive exposure to exhaled e-cigarette
International Agency for Research on Cancer in the room air. aerosol in a simulated café, Schober et al39 found that con-
Czogala et al49 conducted a chamber study of secondhand centrations of fine particles in the air increased from a median
exposure to e-cigarette aerosol compared with cigarette smoke, of 400 particles per 1 cm3 with people simply sitting in the
finding that, on average, bystanders would be exposed to nico- room for 2 hours to medians of 49 000 to 88 000 particles per
tine but at levels 1/10th that of cigarette smoke ( e-cigarette 1 cm3 (depending on the e-cigarette fluid used) after 2 hours of
aerosol, 3.32±2.49 μg/m3; cigarette smoke, 31.60±6.91 μg/m3; e-cigarette use in the same room
P=0.008). Both e-cigarette aerosol and cigarette smoke con- Both the e-liquid and the Poly-fil fibers that are used to
tained fine particles (PM ), with e-cigarette aerosol particle absorb the e-liquid for heating and conversion to an aerosol
2.5
concentrations ranging from 6.6 to 85.0 μg/m3. E-cigarette come into contact with heating elements that contain heavyGrana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1977
Figure 3. Particle number distribution from (A)
mainstream aerosol in e-liquid 1 and from (B) con-
ventional cigarette. Reproduced from Fuoco et al55
with permission from the publisher. Copyright ©
2013 Elsevier Ltd.
metals (tin, nickel, copper, lead, chromium). Williams et al58 lungs and cross into the systemic circulation. At a minimum,
found heavy metals in samples of e-cigarette liquids and these studies show that e-cigarette aerosol is not merely
aerosol. Tin, which appeared to originate from solder joints, “water vapor” as is often claimed in the marketing for these
was found as both particles and tin whiskers in the fluid and products. Tests on e-cigarettes show much lower levels of
Poly-fil, and e-cigarette fluid containing tin was cytotoxic to most toxicants, but not particles, than conventional cigarettes.
human pulmonary fibroblasts. E-cigarette aerosol also con- The thresholds for human toxicity of potential toxicants in
tained other metals, including nickel, 2 to 100 times higher e-cigarette vapor are not known, and the possibility of health
than found in Marlboro cigarette smoke. The nickel and chro- risks to primary users of the products and those exposed pas-
mium nanoparticles (<100 nm) possibly originated from the sively to their emissions must be considered.
heating element. It is likely that engineering features, includ-
ing the nature of the battery, the heating temperature of the Nicotine Absorption
liquid, and the type of heating element and reservoir, will Early studies of nicotine absorption in 2010 found that
influence the nature, number, and size of particles produced. e-cigarettes delivered much lower levels of plasma nicotine
These metal nanoparticles can deposit into alveolar sacs in than conventional cigarettes,59,60 whereas a more recent study
the lungs, potentially causing local respiratory toxicity and demonstrated that more experienced users using their own
entering the bloodstream. product who engaged in more puff intervals have nicotine
In summary, the particle size distribution and number of absorption similar to that with conventional cigarettes,61–63
particles delivered by e-cigarettes are similar to those of con- perhaps as a result of a combination of characteristics of the
ventional cigarettes, with most particles in the ultrafine range devices and user vaping topography.63 Another study of smok-
(modes, ≈100–200 nm). Particle delivery appears to depend ers smoking e-cigarettes using a specified protocol found a
on the nicotine level in the e-cigarette fluid but not the pres- similar rise in serum cotinine immediately after use (mean
ence of flavors. Smokers exhale some of these particles, increase, ≈20 ng/mL).47 Several studies reported that regard-
which exposes bystanders to “passive vaping.” Like cigarettes, less of nicotine delivery, e-cigarettes can modestly alleviate
e-cigarette particles are small enough to reach deep into the some symptoms of withdrawal, and participants positively1978 Circulation May 13, 2014
appraised the use of e-cigarettes.62–65 In a study comparing passive exposure to e-cigarette vapor did not result in a sig-
the nicotine inhalator and e-cigarettes,60 the nicotine inhalator nificant increase in these biomarkers over 1 hour of exposure.
delivered an amount of nicotine similar to that in the 16-mg Schober et al39 found elevated levels of exhaled nitric oxide
e-cigarette; however, the authors noted that the e-cigarette in people using a nicotine e-cigarette (but not a nicotine-free
malfunctioned and did not deliver any nicotine in a third of e-cigarette), which the authors attributed to pulmonary
participants. These results highlight the need for product regu- inflammation.
lation in terms of drug delivery and effects, as well as device National Vaper’s Club, a pro–e-cigarette advocacy group,
functioning and labeling. published a “risk assessment” of e-cigarette and cigarette use
that concluded that “neither vapor from e-liquids or cigarette
Health Effects smoke analytes posed a condition of ‘significant risk’ of harm
Propylene glycol and glycerin are the main base ingredients of to human health via the inhalation route of exposure.”77 The
the e-liquid. Exposure to propylene glycol can cause eye and authors failed to detect benzo(a)pyrene in conventional ciga-
respiratory irritation, and prolonged or repeated inhalation rette smoke despite the fact that it is an established carcino-
in industrial settings may affect the central nervous system, gen in cigarette smoke, and their assessment of conventional
behavior, and the spleen.66 In its product safety materials, Dow cigarettes concluded that they did not pose significant risk,
Chemical Company states that “inhalation exposure to [pro- both of which point to fatal errors in the data, data analysis,
pylene glycol] mists should be avoided,”67 and the American or both. Another report15 funded by the Consumer Advocates
Chemistry Council warns against its use in theater fogs for Smoke-free Alternatives Association and published on the
because of the potential for eye and respiratory irritation.68 Internet used occupational threshold limit values to evalu-
When heated and vaporized, propylene glycol can form pro- ate the potential risk posed by several toxins in e-cigarettes,
pylene oxide, an International Agency for Research on Cancer concluding that “there is no evidence that vaping produces
class 2B carcinogen,69 and glycerol forms acrolein, which can inhalable exposures to contaminants of the aerosol that would
cause upper respiratory tract irritation.70,71 warrant health concerns by the standards that are used to
Major injuries and illness have resulted from e-cigarette ensure safety of workplaces.” Threshold limit values are an
use,72 including explosions and fires.73,74 Less serious adverse approach to assessing health effects for occupational chemi-
events include throat and mouth irritation, cough, nausea, cal exposures that are generally much higher (often orders of
and vomiting.72 magnitude higher) than levels considered acceptable for ambi-
A study75 of healthy smokers’ pulmonary function after ent or population-level exposures. Occupational exposures
acute ad lib puffing of an e-cigarette (Nobacco, medium, 11 also do not consider exposure to sensitive subgroups such as
mg) for 5 minutes (after refraining from smoking tobacco people with medical conditions, children, and infants who
cigarettes for 4 hours) found no effect on spirometry but did might be exposed to secondhand e-cigarette emissions, most
find significantly increased dynamic airway resistance (18%) notably nicotine.
and decreased expired nitric oxide (16%). Sham e-cigarette In summary, only a few studies have directly investigated
use had no significant effect. This study is limited by the small the health effects of exposure to e-cigarette aerosol, but some
sample size, the short period of tobacco use abstinence before demonstrate the ability of e-cigarette aerosol exposure to
protocol execution, the short length of exposure to e-cigarette result in biological effects. Long-term biological effects are
aerosol, and the lack of comparison with smoking conven- unknown at this time because e-cigarettes have not been in
tional cigarettes. In addition, smokers in general have high widespread use long enough for assessment.
airway resistance with dynamic testing and lower expired
nitric oxide, likely as a result of oxidant stress. Despite these Effects on Cessation of Conventional Cigarettes
limitations, this study suggests that e-cigarette use constricts E-cigarettes are promoted as smoking cessation aids, and
peripheral airways, possibly as a result of the irritant effects many individuals who use e-cigarettes believe that they will
of propylene glycol, which could be of particular concern in help them quit smoking conventional cigarettes.7,29,30 The
people with chronic lung disease such as asthma, emphysema, assumption that e-cigarettes will be as effective as or more
or chronic bronchitis. effective than pharmaceutical NRTs has also motivated sup-
Flouris et al47 assessed the short-term effects of e-cigarette port for e-cigarettes among some public health researchers
use on pulmonary function in 15 cigarette smokers who and policy makers78 and (as discussed later) formed the basis
puffed an e-cigarette (>60% propylene glycol, 11 mg/mL for some public policies on the regulation of e-cigarettes.
nicotine) and a conventional cigarette according to a speci-
fied protocol, and passive exposure to e-cigarette aerosol and Population-Based Studies
conventional cigarette smoke with 15 never smokers. Active There are 4 longitudinal studies4,79–81 and 1 cross-sectional
cigarette smoking resulted in a significant decrease in expired study82 of the association between e-cigarette use and quitting
lung volume (forced expiratory volume in the first second of conventional cigarettes (Table 2).
expiration/forced inspiratory vital capacity) that was not seen Adkison et al4 studied current and former smokers in the
with active e-cigarette use or with passive tobacco cigarette or International Tobacco Control study in the United States,
e-cigarette exposure. Additional analysis of the data collected Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia at baseline and
in this study76 found that white cell count increased after ciga- 1 year later and found that e-cigarette users had a statistically
rette smoking, reflecting inflammatory process–associated significant greater reduction in cigarettes per day (e-cigarette
risk for acute cardiovascular events. Active e-cigarette use and users, 20.1 to 16.3 cigarettes per day; nonusers, 16.9 to 15.0Grana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1979
Table 2. Population Studies of the Association Between E-Cigarette Use and Cessation of Conventional
Cigarette Smoking
Odds of Quitting
Study Location and Study Design (95% CI)
Longitudinal studies
Adkison et al4 (2013) US, UK, Canada, Australia (ITC), surveyed, 1 y apart 0.81 (0.43–1.53)*
Vickerman et al80 (2013) US quit-line callers from 6 states surveyed at enrollment and 7 mo later 0.50 (0.40–0.63)†
Grana et al79 (2014) US sample drawn from a nationally representative Internet panel, 1 y apart 0.76 (0.36–1.60)
Choi and Forster81 (2014) Midwestern young adults, 1 y apart 0.93 (0.19–4.63)
Cross-sectional study
Popova and Ling82 (2013) US sample drawn from a nationally represented Internet panel 0.69 (0.52–0.94) *
All studies
Pooled‡ 0.61 (0.50–0.75)
CI indicates confidence interval; E-cigarette, electronic cigarette; and ITC, International Tobacco Control.
*Odds ratios obtained by contacting authors.
†Computed by authors of this report on the basis of the numbers reported.
‡Estimated with a random-effects meta-analysis using Stata 12.1 metan. There was no evidence of heterogeneity (P=0.28) or
evidence of publication bias with the use of a funnel plot.
cigarettes per day). Although 85% of e-cigarette users reported baseline, 11% of those who used e-cigarettes at least 1 day in
they were using the product to quit smoking at the initial wave, the past 30 days at baseline quit smoking at follow-up com-
e-cigarette users were no more likely to have quit 1 year later pared with 17% of smokers who never used e-cigarettes. In a
than nonusers (OR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.43–1.53; P=0.52). logistic regression controlling for demographics and baseline
Vickerman et al80 found that ≈31% of quit-line callers cigarettes per day, baseline past 30-day e-cigarette use was not
surveyed 7 months after enrollment reported that they had a significant predictor of having quit at follow-up (OR, 0.93;
ever tried e-cigarettes. The majority used them for <1 month 95% CI, 0.19–4.63; P=0.93). There was also no significant
(67.1%), and 9.2% were using them at the 7-month survey. change in the number of conventional cigarettes smoked per
The main reason for e-cigarette use was tobacco cessation day between those who did and did not use e-cigarettes (differ-
(51.3%), but it is not known whether ever use occurred as part ence, 0.2 cigarettes per day; 95% CI, −3.72 to 4.18; P=0.91).
of a quit attempt in the preceding 7 months. Although quit-line In a national cross-sectional sample, Popova and Ling82
callers represent a small population of smokers motivated to found that adult smokers who ever used e-cigarettes were sig-
quit, these data present a real-world estimate of the potential nificantly less likely to be former smokers compared to those
effectiveness of using e-cigarettes for cessation in a popula- who never used e-cigarettes (OR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.52–0.94),
tion of smokers motivated to quit. Although this study had a controlling for demographics (Lucy Popova, personal com-
low response rate (34.6%) and may be subject to recall bias munication). In an examination of only those who tried to
because e-cigarette use and perceptions were assessed only at quit, those who ever used e -cigarettes were significantly less
the 7-month follow-up, those who reported using e-cigarettes likely to be former smokers than never users (adjusted OR,
were statistically significantly less likely to quit than those 0.61; 95% CI, 0.45–0.83).
who had not used e-cigarettes (21.7% among callers who used Combining these results in a random-effects meta-analysis
for ≥1 month, 16.6% among those who used for <1 month, (Table 2) yields a pooled OR of 0.61 (95% CI, 0.50–0.75),
and 31.4% among never users; P<0.001). The unadjusted odds indicating that e-cigarette use in the real world is associated
of quitting were statistically significantly lower for e-cigarette with significantly lower odds of quitting smoking cigarettes.
users compared with nonusers (OR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.40–0.63). A limitation of 3 of these studies4,80,82 is that they did not con-
Grana et al79 explored predictors of quitting among a trol for level of nicotine dependence. It is possible that more
national sample of smokers who participated in a study in dependent smokers, who would have more difficulty quitting
2011 and follow-up in 2012. Current e-cigarette use (past 30 in general, would be the ones who would be more likely to
days) at baseline did not predict a greater likelihood of having experiment with e-cigarettes, which could contribute to the
quit at the follow-up (OR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.35–1.46). In a sec- finding that e-cigarette use is associated with a lower quit rate.
ond logistic regression model that included baseline cigarettes
per day, time to first cigarette, and intention to quit, in addition Clinical Trials
to baseline current e-cigarette use, only intention to quit (OR, Four clinical trials (2 with very small samples) examined
5.59; 95% CI, 2.41–12.98) and cigarettes per day (OR, 0.97; the efficacy of e-cigarettes for smoking cessation.83–86 Three
95% CI, 0.94–0.99) were significant predictors of having quit trials83-85 did not have a control group who were not using
at follow-up; current e-cigarette use remained nonsignificant e-cigarettes. The other study86 compared e-cigarette efficacy
(OR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.36–1.60). to a standard-of-care regimen with a 21-mg nicotine patch.
Choi and Forster81 followed up a cohort of young adults in None of the trials were conducted with the level of behav-
Midwestern (recruited October 2010–March 2011 and followed ioral support that accompanies most pharmaceutical trials for
up for 1 year). Among those who were smoking cigarettes at smoking cessation.1980 Circulation May 13, 2014
Polosa et al83 conducted a proof-of-concept study in Italy in ones had to be sent frequently). An author on all of these
2010 with smokers18 to 60 years of age not intending to quit in studies, R. Polosa, served as a consultant for the Arbi Group
the next 30 days. Subjects were offered Categoria e-cigarettes SRL, the manufacturer of the Categoria e-cigarette used in
and instructed to use up to 4 cartridges (7.4-mg nicotine con- the study, beginning in February 2011.
tent) per day as desired to reduce smoking and to keep a log Bullen et al86 conducted a randomized, controlled, clini-
of cigarettes per day, cartridges per day, and adverse events. cal trial of e-cigarettes compared with medicinal NRT in
Six-month follow-up was completed with 68% of participants Auckland, New Zealand. Adult smokers motivated to quit
(27 of 40): 13 were using both e-cigarettes and tobacco ciga- were randomized to the 3 study arms (16-mg e-cigarette,
rettes, 5 maintained exclusive tobacco cigarette smoking, and 21-mg NRT patch, no-nicotine e-cigarette). Voluntary tele-
9 stopped using tobacco cigarettes while continuing to use phone counseling was offered to all subjects. Subjects were
e-cigarettes. Cigarette consumption was reduced by at least observed at baseline, 1 week (quit day), 12 weeks, and 6
50% in the 13 dual users (25 cigarettes per day at baseline months. Fifty-seven percent of participants in the nicotine
to 6 cigarettes per day at 6 months; P<0.001). Polosa et al87 e-cigarettes group reduced their cigarettes per day by ≥50%
continued follow-up of this sample at 18 and 24 months with at 6 months compared with 41% in the patch group (P=0.002)
23 subjects (58% of the original 40 enrolled). Among the 23 and 45% in the nonnicotine e-cigarette group (P=0.08). Those
participants who completed a 24-month visit, 18 continued to randomized to the nicotine patch group were less adherent to
smoke, and 11 had reduced cigarette consumption by ≥50% the treatment (46%) than the 16-mg e-cigarette group (78%)
with a statistically significant reduction from an average of 24 and the no-nicotine e-cigarette group (82%). Of note, the
to 4 cigarettes per day (P=0.003). Five participants had quit study methodology may have introduced bias against success
tobacco cigarettes at 24 months. Study limitations included in the nicotine patch group because e-cigarettes were mailed
the use of a poor-quality product and the lack of a comparison for free directly to participants randomized to either the nico-
or control group, which could make it difficult to determine tine or no-nicotine e-cigarette group, whereas participants in
whether quit rates achieved were not due to chance. the patch group were mailed cards redeemable for nicotine
Caponnetto et al85 conducted a similar study with 14 smok- patches at a pharmacy and vouchers to cover the modest fee.
ers with schizophrenia not intending to quit in the next 30 days. Therefore, although the protocol for providing the patches
Participants were provided the same Categoria e-cigarette, represented “usual care” for New Zealand quit-line callers,
and carbon monoxide, product use, number of cigarettes this procedure may have introduced bias against NRT, making
smoked, and positive and negative symptoms of schizophre- it difficult to view the study as a head-to-head comparison of
nia were assessed at baseline and 4, 8, 12, 24, and 52 weeks. e-cigarettes and NRT for cessation. There were no statistically
Seven of 14 participants (50%) sustained a 50% reduction in significant differences in biochemically confirmed (breath
the number of cigarettes per day smoked at week 52, and the CO) self-reported continuous abstinence from quit day to the
median of 30 cigarettes per day decreased to 15 cigarettes per 6-month follow-up between the nicotine e-cigarette (7.3%),
day (P=0.018). Sustained abstinence from smoking occurred nicotine patch (5.8%), and nonnicotine e-cigarette (4.1%).
with 2 participants (14.3%) by week 52. Positive and nega- Neither Capponnetto et al84 nor Bullen et al86 found effects
tive aspects of schizophrenia were not increased after smok- of e-cigarette use on quitting beyond what is seen in unassisted
ing cessation. The most common outcome was dual use of or low-assistance studies of smokers using NRT to quit.88 In
e-cigarettes with conventional cigarettes. Study findings are determining the effectiveness of smoking cessation therapy,
not generalizable to smokers with mental illness because of active drug is considered efficacious when it outperforms pla-
the very small sample size and lack of a control group. cebo; therefore, the evidence to date from clinical trials does
Caponnetto et al84 also conducted a randomized, not demonstrate that e-cigarettes are efficacious for cessation.
quasi-controlled trial to examine the efficacy of e-cigarettes However, it is possible that e-cigarettes even without nico-
of different strengths for smoking cessation and reduction in tine act as substitutes for the sensory and behavioral effects
3 study arms: 12 weeks of treatment with the 7.2-mg nicotine of conventional cigarettes. If this is the case, the nonnicotine
e-cigarette, a 12-week nicotine-tapering regimen (6 weeks of placebo e-cigarette would be considered an active treatment
treatment with a 7.2-mg e-cigarette and 6 weeks with a 5.4-mg condition and, as discussed previously, has been shown to
e-cigarette), and a 12-week treatment with a nonnicotine reduce withdrawal symptoms.59,60,63,89 Important limitations
e-cigarette. Similar reductions in the median cigarettes per of the current research include the use of e-cigarettes that
day were seen at all study visits for all 3 treatment arms (7–10 deliver relatively low levels of nicotine and the provision of
cigarettes per day at 1 year). There was no statistically sig- minimal behavioral counseling. Another important limita-
nificant difference in 6-month or 1-year quit rate among the 3 tion of studies assessing the effectiveness of e-cigarettes for
conditions (1-year rates: 4% for placebo e-cigarette users, 9% smoking cessation is that, because they are not approved as
for low-nicotine e-cigarette users, and 13% for high-nicotine cessation therapy, there are no therapeutic instructions for
e-cigarette users). The authors noted that those who initiated using them as replacements or to quit smoking (eg, dosage
quitting in the first few weeks of the study stayed quitters, tapering, duration of use, how to combine them with behav-
whereas those who did not remained dual users throughout ioral strategies, guidance for discontinuation).
the study. Twenty-six percent of quitters continued to use In contrast to the assumption that e-cigarettes would func-
e-cigarettes at 1 year. Problems with the study include the tion as a better form of NRT, population-based studies that
lack of a control group not using e-cigarettes and noted lack reflect real-world e-cigarette use found that e-cigarette use is
of product quality (the devices malfunctioned often, and new not associated with successful quitting; all4,79,80,82 had pointGrana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1981
estimates of the odds of quitting of <1.0. The 1 clinical trial additional cigarettes per day. Thus, if dual use of e-cigarettes
examining the effectiveness of e-cigarettes (both with and and cigarettes results in reductions in the number of ciga-
without nicotine) compared with the medicinal nicotine patch rettes per day for current smokers, any reduction malignancy
found that e-cigarettes are no better than the nicotine patch risk will be less than proportional to the reduction in ciga-
and that all treatments produced very modest quit rates with- rette consumption because of the (likely larger) importance
out counseling.86 Taken together, these studies suggest that of duration of smoking.
e-cigarettes are not associated with successful quitting in gen-
eral population-based samples of smokers. What to Tell Patients About
E-Cigarettes and Cessation
Health Implications of Cigarette First and foremost, clinicians must support a smoker’s quit
Reduction in the Context of Dual Use attempt and try to ensure any that advice given does not
Among adults, reductions in cigarettes per day were observed undermine their motivation to quit. Clinicians should follow
in several of the clinical studies83,84,86 and in 1 population-based the 5 A’s of evidence-based treatment: ask, advise, assess,
study4 among those who did not quit. Reduction in cigarettes assist, and arrange.104 They should assess their patient’s
smoked per day could have benefit if it promotes subsequent motivation and readiness to quit and recommend a treatment
cessation, as has been found with NRT,90 but this pattern has plan that should include setting a quit date and obtaining ces-
not yet been seen with e-cigarettes. In the cigarette reduction sation counseling and, if appropriate, conventional smoking
analyses presented in some of the studies, many participants cessation medications. The safest and most proven smoking
were still smoking about half a pack cigarettes per day at the cessation pharmacotherapies are the nicotine replacement
end of the study. medications varenicline and bupropion, which have been
Both duration (years of cigarette use) and intensity (ciga- approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
rettes per day) determine the negative health effects of smok- Referral to a free telephone quit line (eg, 1-800-QUIT-NOW)
ing.91 People who stop smoking at younger ages have lower or another counseling support program enhances the effec-
age-adjusted mortality compared with those who continued to tiveness of smoking cessation medications.104
smoke later into adulthood.92 Findings for decreased smoking If a patient has failed initial treatment, has been intolerant of
intensity have been less consistent, with some studies showing or refuses to use conventional smoking cessation medication,
lower mortality with reduced daily cigarette consumption93 and wishes to use e-cigarettes to aid quitting, it is reasonable
and others not finding a significant overall survival benefit.94 to support the attempt. However, subjects should be informed
The 2014 report of the US Surgeon General concluded that that, although e-cigarette aerosol is likely to be much less
“reducing the number of cigarettes smoked per day is much toxic than cigarette smoking, the products are unregulated,
less effective than quitting entirely for avoiding the risks of contain toxic chemicals, and have not been proven as cessa-
premature death from all smoking-related causes of death.”95 tion devices. The patient should also be advised not to use
Use of electronic cigarettes by cigarette smokers to cut down the product indoors or around children because studies show
on the number of cigarettes smoked per day is likely to have that bystanders may be exposed to nicotine and other toxins
much smaller beneficial effects on overall survival compared (at levels much lower than cigarettes) through passive expo-
with quitting smoking completely. sure to the e-cigarette aerosol. Because there are no long-term
This situation is particularly likely to exist for cardiovas- safety studies of e-cigarette use, patients should be urged to
cular disease because of the highly nonlinear dose-response set a quit date for their e-cigarette use and not plan to use it
relationship between exposure to fine particles and the risk of indefinitely. It is also important to stress that patients should
cardiovascular disease.53,96 Light smoking, even 1 to 4 ciga- quit smoking cigarettes entirely as soon as possible because
rettes per day, is associated with markedly elevated risk of car- continued cigarette smoking, even at reduced levels, contin-
diovascular disease.97 In addition, e-cigarettes deliver loads of ues to impose tobacco-induced health risks (particularly for
fine particles similar to those of conventional cigarettes. cardiovascular disease).
The relative risk of death from lung cancer increases with
years smoked and cigarettes per day,98 as well as pancreatic Tobacco Industry and Involvement
cancer99 and esophageal cancer.100 The relative risk of both By 2013, the major tobacco companies had purchased or
lung cancer and bladder cancer levels off after a certain num- developed e-cigarette products (Table 3).
ber of cigarettes per day,101 suggesting that above a certain There is no evidence that the cigarette companies are
intensity, the specific levels of exposure may not cause sig- acquiring or producing e-cigarettes as part of a strategy to
nificant differences in risk for these cancers. Doll and Peto102 phase out regular cigarettes, even though some claim to want
found a dose-response relationship between duration of to participate in “harm reduction.” Lorillard CEO Murray
smoking and number of cigarettes smoked per day and risk Kessler stated in an interview with the Wall Street Journal that
of lung cancer, with models suggesting the impact of dura- e-cigarettes will provide smokers an unprecedented chance to
tion to be greater than that of intensity. Using participants reduce their risk from cigarettes.105 He also published an op-ed
from the Cancer Prevention Study II, Flanders et al103 found a in USA Today on September 23, 2013, stating: “E-cigarettes
greater increase in lung cancer mortality with a greater dura- might be the most significant harm-reduction option ever
tion of cigarette smoking compared with a greater intensity made available to smokers.”106 Shortly before this op-ed was
of smoking. Overall, these data suggest that lung cancer mor- published, however, Lorillard won approval from the US
tality increases more with additional years of smoking than FDA to market new nonmentholated Newport conventional1982 Circulation May 13, 2014
Table 3. Tobacco Companies That Have Acquired or Created Some countries (including Brazil, Singapore, Canada,
E-Cigarette Companies and Brands (as of January 2014) the Seychelles, and Uruguay) have prohibited the sale of
e-cigarettes, and many others are developing policies.1 The
Acquired E-Cigarette
United States, European Union, and United Kingdom illus-
Tobacco Company Company E-Cigarette Brand(s)
trate the range of regulatory approaches being developed.
Altria Inc GreenSmoke Mark Ten
Reynolds American Inc No Vuse The United States
Lorillard Blu Cigs, Inc Blu In the United States, as of March 2014, e-cigarette products
British American Tobacco CN Creative Vype remained unregulated by any federal authority, particularly the
Imperial Tobacco Dragonite Holdings Ltd Ruyan US FDA. The Sottera Inc case ruling that was upheld on appeal
Swisher No E-Swisher in the US court found that e-cigarettes could be regulated as
tobacco products unless they are marketed with health and
E-cigarette indicates electronic cigarette.
therapeutic claims.113 The US FDA has stated its intent to assert
(“deem”) authority over e-cigarettes but has yet to act. The US
cigarettes, expanding their cigarette line while touting their FDA does not have the authority to regulate where e-cigarettes
ability to offer a product they claim reduces harm from cig- are used; that is the domain of state and local governments,
arettes. This allows the cigarette companies to have it both where almost all activity on smoke-free laws has occurred.
ways. (Likewise, after evaluating the cigarette companies’ Since e-cigarettes entered the US market in 2008, there
internal documents and public positions on snus [a form of has been a rapid increase in the number of municipalities and
moist snuff tobacco in a pouch popular in Sweden] as “harm states that have adopted legislation regulating where e-ciga-
reduction” in Europe, Gilmore et al107 found that they were rettes can be used and laws restricting sales to minors. As of
entering the snus market107 and adopting “harm reduction” March 2014, 27 states had laws restricting sales to minors,
rhetoric108 to protect their cigarette business as long as pos- 1 state (Minnesota) taxed e-cigarettes as tobacco products,
sible.) As noted in the 2010 Surgeon General’s report,109 the and 3 states (New Jersey, North Dakota, and Utah) and
tobacco industry has used every iteration of cigarette design >100 municipalities (including New York, Los Angeles, San
to undermine cessation and prevention. Francisco, and Chicago) prohibited the use of e-cigarettes in
The tobacco companies address e-cigarette issues as part of 100% smoke-free indoor environments.114 An additional 9
their policy agenda. As they did beginning in the 1980s,110,111 states restricted e-cigarettes in other venues such as school
they continue to engage in creating and supporting “smok- district property, Department of Corrections/prisons, public
ers’ rights” groups, seemingly independent groups that educational facilities and grounds, and commuter transit sys-
interact with consumers directly on political involvement in tems.114 Some local and statewide smoke-free laws enacted
support of their agenda.111 Altria and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco before the introduction of e-cigarettes include language that
Company maintain Web sites called Citizens for Tobacco could be interpreted as including e-cigarettes.
Rights and Transform Tobacco. E-cigarette news and action
alerts are featured on the home pages of these websites and European Union Tobacco Product Directive
include instructions for taking action against bills designed In February 2014, the European Parliament approved a
to include e-cigarette use in smoke-free laws. E-cigarette revised European Union Tobacco Product Directive that regu-
companies engage in similar tactics, using the same politi- lates e-cigarettes with nicotine concentrations up to 20 mg/mL
cal and public relations strategies as the tobacco companies (an amount equal to that in a pack of cigarettes) as tobacco
(most notably featuring organized “vapers” like the organized products.115 E-cigarettes with higher nicotine concentrations
smokers). They also use social media that is tightly integrated or intended therapeutic uses will be regulated as medical
with their product marketing campaigns to press their pol- devices.116 The directive stipulates that e-cigarettes must be
icy agenda.22 These strategies were successfully deployed childproof and that packaging must include information about
in Europe to convince the European Parliament to substan- ingredients, adverse effects, and health warnings.115 Refillable
tially weaken the proposed EU Tobacco Product Directive in cartridges are allowed as long as their volume does not exceed
October 2013.112 2 mL (but could be banned by the European Commission if
at least 3 member states prohibit them on the basis of risks to
Current State of Global human health).115 Marketing and advertising restrictions will
Regulation (March 2014) mirror those of tobacco products.115
Like e-cigarette products, the policy environment related to
e-cigarettes is rapidly developing despite the fact that the sci- The United Kingdom
ence is just emerging. Policy makers in many countries are In the United Kingdom, the Medicines and Healthcare Products
under considerable pressure to provide regulatory guidance Regulatory Agency announced a plan to regulate e-cigarettes as
regarding e-cigarettes, often on the basis of the assumption that medicines on the basis of the assumption that e-cigarettes func-
e-cigarettes will contribute to reducing the harms of smoking tion like NRTs for smokers wishing to cut down or quit.78 As of
either by serving as a smoking cessation aid or by replacing January 2014, Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory
combusted cigarettes. The data reviewed here, together with Agency policies did not include any restrictions on e -cigarette
evidence of dual use and youth initiation of e-cigarette use, do marketing.117 The antismoking advocacy group Action on
not demonstrate any hypothesized harm-reducing effect. Smoking and Health UK has announced that it “does notGrana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1983
consider it appropriate to include e-cigarettes under smokefree television and radio in many countries that have long banned
regulations,”118 supporting one of the e-cigarette companies’ similar advertising for cigarettes and other tobacco products
key marketing messages that e-cigarettes can be used every- and may be indirectly promoting smoking conventional cig-
where without the restrictions and social stigma of smoking.3,119 arettes. Although it is reasonable to assume that, if existing
smokers switched completely from conventional cigarettes
Policy Recommendations
(with no other changes in use patterns) to e-cigarettes, there
E-cigarettes deliver lower levels of some of the toxins found would be a lower disease burden caused by nicotine addiction,
in cigarette smoke. Main concerns about the potential of the evidence available at this time, although limited, points
e-cigarettes to make a contribution to reducing the harm
to high levels of dual use of e-cigarettes with conventional
caused by cigarette smoking arise from effects on youth, dual
cigarettes, no proven cessation benefits, and rapidly increas-
use with cigarettes resulting in delayed or deferred quitting
ing youth initiation with e-cigarettes. Although some cite a
(among both adults and youth), and renormalization of smok-
desire to quit smoking by using the e-cigarette, other common
ing behavior.
reasons for using the products are to circumvent smoke-free
The ultimate effect of e-cigarettes on public health will
laws and to cut down on conventional cigarettes, which may
depend on what happens in the policy environment. These
reinforce dual use patterns and delay or deter quitting.
policies should be implemented to protect public health:
• Prohibit the use of e-cigarettes anywhere that use of con- The trajectory of the dual use pattern among adults or chil-
ventional cigarettes is prohibited. dren is unclear, but studies of youth find that as many as one
• Prohibit the sale of e-cigarettes to anyone who cannot third of youth who use e-cigarettes have never smoked a con-
legally buy cigarettes or in any venues where sale of con- ventional cigarette. Nicotine is a highly addictive substance
ventional cigarettes is prohibited. with negative effects on animal and human brain development,
• Subject e-cigarette marketing to the same level of restric- which is still ongoing in adolescence.120–123 Furthermore, high
tions that apply to conventional cigarettes (including no rates of dual use may result in greater total public health bur-
television or radio advertising). den and possibly increased individual risk if a smoker main-
• Prohibit cobranding e-cigarettes with cigarettes or mar- tains an even low-level tobacco cigarette addiction for many
keting in a way that promotes dual use.
years instead of quitting.
• Prohibit the use of characterizing flavors in e-cigarettes,
Although data are limited, it is clear that e-cigarette emissions
particularly candy and alcohol flavors.
are not merely “harmless water vapor,” as is frequently claimed,
• Prohibit claims that e-cigarettes are effective smoking
and can be a source of indoor air pollution. Smoke-free poli-
cessation aids until e-cigarette manufacturers and com-
cies protect nonsmokers from exposure to toxins and encourage
panies provide sufficient evidence that e-cigarettes can be
smoking cessation.124 One hundred percent smoke-free policies
used effectively for smoking cessation.
have larger effects on consumption and smoking prevalence,125
• Prohibit any health claims for e-cigarette products until
as well as hospital admissions for myocardial infarction, stroke,
and unless approved by regulatory agencies to scientific
and regulatory standards. and other cardiovascular and pulmonary emergencies,126 than
• Establish standards for regulating product ingredients weaker policies. Introducing e-cigarettes into clean air envi-
and functioning. ronments may result in population harm if use of the product
reinforces the act of smoking as socially acceptable or if use
In addition to being important in their own right, should
undermines the benefits of smoke-free policies.
these policies be put in place together with polices designed
to make combustible tobacco products (eg, cigarettes, cigars,
Acknowledgments
cigarillos) less desirable and available, it is possible that cur-
rent conventional cigarette smokers who will not quit nicotine We thank the following individuals for their advice and feedback:
Cort Anastasio, PhD; John Balmes, MD; Cynthia Hallett, MPH; Sara
would shift to e-cigarettes without major dual use or youth
Kalkhoran, MD; Lauren Lempert, JD, MPH; C. Arden Pope III, PhD;
initiation to nicotine addiction with e-cigarettes. Absent
Martina Pötschke-Langer, MD, MA; Prudence Talbot, PhD; Michael
this change in the policy environment, it is reasonable to
Thun, MD; Gemma Vestal, JD, MPH, MBA; and the reviewers solic-
assume that the behavior patterns that have been observed
ited by the World Health Organization Tobacco Free Initiative of the
for e-cigarettes will persist, which makes it unlikely that longer report prepared for it.
they will contribute to reducing the harm of tobacco use and
could increase harm by perpetuating the life of conventional Sources of Funding
cigarettes.
This article is a greatly condensed version of a report prepared for
(and supported by) the World Health Organization Tobacco Free
Conclusions Initiative. Additional support came from the University of California
Although most of the discussion of e-cigarettes among health Tobacco Related Disease Research Program 21FT-0040 and grant
1P50CA180890 from the National Cancer Institute and Food and
authorities has concentrated on the product itself, its potential
Drug Administration Center for Tobacco Products. The content is
toxicity, and use of e-cigarettes to help people quit smoking,
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily rep-
the e-cigarette companies have been rapidly expanding using
resent the official views of the National Institutes of Health, the US
aggressive marketing messages similar to those used to promote FDA, or the World Health Organization. Dr Glantz is an American
cigarettes in the 1950s and 1960s. E-cigarette advertising is on Legacy Foundation Distinguished Professor in Tobacco Control.1984 Circulation May 13, 2014
Disclosures GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Prevention and Control, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
Dr Benowitz is a consultant to several pharmaceutical companies that
and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2012.
market smoking cessation medications and has been a paid expert
21. Grana RA, Glantz SA, Ling PM. Electronic nicotine delivery systems in
witness in litigation against tobacco companies. Drs Grana and
the hands of Hollywood. Tob Control. 2011;20:425–426.
Glantz report no conflicts.
22. de Andrade M, Hastings G, Angus K. Promotion of electronic cigarettes:
tobacco marketing reinvented? BMJ. 2013;347:f7473.
References 23. Rooke C, Amos A. News media representations of electronic cigarettes:
an analysis of newspaper coverage in the UK and Scotland [published
1. Grana R, Benowitz N, Glantz SA. Background paper on E-cigarettes (elec-
online ahead of print July 24, 2013]. Tob Control. doi:10.1136/tobaccocon-
tronic nicotine delivery systems). Center for Tobacco Control Research and
trol-2013–051043. http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2013/07/24/
Education, University of California, San Francisco, a WHO Collaborating
tobaccocontrol-2013-051043.short. Accessed September 9, 2013.
Center on Tobacco Control. Prepared for World Health Organization
24. Kim AE, Lee YO, Shafer P, Nonnemaker J, Makarenko O. Adult smok-
Tobacco Free Initiative. December 2013. http://pvw.escholarship.org/uc/
ers’ receptivity to a television advert for electronic nicotine delivery sys-
item/13p2b72n. Accessed March 31, 2014.
tems [published online ahead of print October 3, 2013]. Tob Control.
2. Felberbaum M. Old Tobacco Playbook Gets New Use by E-Cigarettes.
doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013–051130. http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/
The Associated Press. 2013. http://bigstory.ap.org/article/old-tobacco-
content/early/2013/10/03/tobaccocontrol-2013-051130.short. Accessed
playbook-gets-new-use-e-cigarettes. Accessed August 16, 2013.
November 21, 2013.
3. Grana RA, Ling PM. Smoking revolution? A content analysis of electronic
25. TNS Opinion & Social. Attitudes of Europeans Towards Tobacco. Special
cigarette retail websites. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46:395–403.
Eurobarometer 385, Wave Eb77.1 commissioned by the Directorate
4. Adkison SE, O’Connor RJ, Bansal-Travers M, Hyland A, Borland R,
General Health and Consumers of the European Commission; Brussels,
Yong HH, Cummings KM, McNeill A, Thrasher JF, Hammond D, Fong
Belgium; 2012.
GT. Electronic nicotine delivery systems: international tobacco control
26. Etter JF, Bullen C. A longitudinal study of electronic cigarette users.
four-country survey. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44:207–215.
Addict Behav. 2014;39:491–494.
5. King BA, Alam S, Promoff G, Arrazola R, Dube SR. Awareness and ever
27. Douptcheva N, Gmel G, Studer J, Deline S, Etter JF. Use of electronic
use of electronic cigarettes among US adults, 2010–2011. Nicotine Tob
cigarettes among young Swiss men. J Epidemiol Community Health.
Res. 2013;15:1623–1627.
2013;67:1075–1076.
6. Dockrell M, Morrison R, Bauld L, McNeill A. E-cigarettes: prevalence
28. Kralikova E, Novak J, West O, Kmetova A, Hajek P. Do e-cigarettes
and attitudes in Great Britain. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:1737–1744.
have the potential to compete with conventional cigarettes? A survey of
7. Pearson JL, Richardson A, Niaura RS, Vallone DM, Abrams DB.
e-Cigarette awareness, use, and harm perceptions in US adults. Am J conventional cigarette smokers’ experiences with e-cigarettes. Chest.
Public Health. 2012;102:1758–1766. 2013;144:1609–1614.
8. Regan AK, Promoff G, Dube SR, Arrazola R. Electronic nicotine deliv- 29. Etter JF, Bullen C. Electronic cigarette: users profile, utilization, satisfac-
ery systems: adult use and awareness of the “e-cigarette” in the USA. tion and perceived efficacy. Addiction. 2011;106:2017–2028.
Tob Control. 2013;22:19–23. 30. Goniewicz ML, Lingas EO, Hajek P. Patterns of electronic cigarette use
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Notes from the field: elec- and user beliefs about their safety and benefits: an internet survey. Drug
tronic cigarette use among middle and high school students—United Alcohol Rev. 2013;32:133–140.
States, 2011–2012. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62:729–730. 31. Choi K, Forster JL. Beliefs and experimentation with electronic ciga-
10. Lee S, Grana RA, Glantz SA. Electronic-cigarette use among Korean rettes: a prospective analysis among young adults. Am J Prev Med.
adolescents: a cross-sectional study of market penetration, dual use, 2014;46:175–178.
and relationship to quit attempts and former smoking [published online 32. Reddy A. Personal communication: GYTS data Latvia and Finland,
ahead of print November 22, 2013]. J Adolesc Health. doi: 10.1016/j. November 12, 2013.
jadohealth.2013.11.003. http://www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X% 33. Goniewicz ML, Zielinska-Danch W. Electronic cigarette use among teen-
2813%2900748-9. Accessed November 22, 2013. agers and young adults in Poland. Pediatrics. 2012;130:e879–e885.
11. Dutra L, Glantz SA. E-cigarettes and conventional cigarette use among 34. Utah Department of Health. Utah health status update: electronic ciga-
U.S. adolescents: a cross-sectional study [published online ahead of print rette use among Utah students (grades 8, 10, and 12) and adults. Updated
March 6, 2014]. JAMA Ped. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.5488. December 2013. http://tobacco.ucsf.edu/e-cigarette-use-among-kids-
http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1840772. skyrocketing-utah-levels-much-higher-among-adults. Accessed February
Accessed March 6, 2013. 2, 2014.
12. World Health Organization. WHO Study Group on Tobacco Product 35. Hadwiger ME, Trehy ML, Ye W, Moore T, Allgire J, Westenberger B.
Regulation: report on the scientific basis of tobacco product regulation. Identification of amino-tadalafil and rimonabant in electronic ciga-
WHO Technical Report Series. 2009:i–21. rette products using high pressure liquid chromatography with diode
13. FCTC/COP/5/13. Report: Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems, Including array and tandem mass spectrometric detection. J Chromatogr A.
Electronic Cigarettes. Seoul, Republic of Korea; 2012. 2010;1217:7547–7555.
14. Schaller K, Ruppert L, Kahnert S, Bethke C, Nair U, Pötschke-Langer M. 36. Trehy ML, Ye W, Hadwiger ME, Moore TW, Allgire JF, Woodruff JT,
Electronic Cigarettes: An Overview. Heidelberg, Germany: German Cancer Ahadi SS, Black JC, Westenberger BJ. Analysis of electronic cigarette
Research Center (DKFZ); 2013. cartridges, refill solutions, and smoke for nicotine and nicotine related
15. Burstyn I. Peering through the Mist: What Does the Chemistry of impurities. J Liq Chromatogr Relat Technol. 2011;34:1442–1458.
Contaminants in Electronic Cigarettes Tell Us About Health Risks? 37. Goniewicz ML, Kuma T, Gawron M, Knysak J, Kosmider L. Nicotine
Technical Report July-August 2013. http://publichealth.drexel.edu/~/ levels in electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:158–166.
media/Files/publichealth/ms08.pdf. Accessed September 23, 2013. 38. Cameron JM, Howell DN, White JR, Andrenyak DM, Layton ME, Roll
16. Trtchounian A, Talbot P. Electronic nicotine delivery systems: is there a JM. Variable and potentially fatal amounts of nicotine in e-cigarette nico-
need for regulation? Tob Control. 2011;20:47–52. tine solutions. Tob Control. 2014;23:77–78.
17. Givens A, Cheng P-S. I-Team: E-cigarettes, used to smoke marijuana, 39. Schober W, Szendrei K, Matzen W, Osiander-Fuchs H, Heitmann
spark new concerns. 4 New York. October 11, 2013. http://www. D, Schettgen T, Jorres RA, Fromme H. Use of electronic cigarettes
nbcnewyork.com/investigations/ECigarettes-Drugs-Marijuana-Vapor- (e-cigarettes) impairs indoor air quality and increases FeNO levels of
Pens-Smoking-I-Team-227269001.html. Accessed November 12, 2013. e-cigarette consumers [published online ahead of print December 6,
18. Shuman P, Burns M. Latest cannibis craze: marijuana known as “wax.” 2013]. Int J Hyg Environ Health. doi: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.11.003. http://
myFoxLA.com. May 24, 2013. http://www.myfoxla.com/story/22305076/ dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.11.003. Accessed February 10, 2014.
its-the-latest-cannabis-craze-a-concerntrated-marijuana-known-as-wax. 40. Goniewicz ML, Hajek P, McRobbie H. Nicotine content of electronic cig-
Accessed November 12, 2013. arettes, its release in vapour and its consistency across batches: regulatory
19. Williams M, Talbot P. Variability among electronic cigarettes in the implications. Addiction. 2014;109:500–507.
pressure drop, airflow rate, and aerosol production. Nicotine Tob Res. 41. Goniewicz ML, Knysak J, Gawron M, Kosmider L, Sobczak A, Kurek J,
2011;13:1276–1283. Prokopowicz A, Jablonska-Czapla M, Rosik-Dulewska C, Havel C. Levels
20. US Department of Health and Human Services. Preventing tobacco use of selected carcinogens and toxicants in vapour from electronic cigarettes.
among youth and young adults: a report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, Tob Control. 2014;23:133–139.Grana et al E-Cigarettes: A Scientific Review 1985
42. Kim HJ, Shin HS. Determination of tobacco-specific nitrosamines in replace- 65. Nides MA, Leischow SJ, Bhatter M, Simmons M. Nicotine blood levels
ment liquids of electronic cigarettes by liquid c hromatography-tandem and short-term smoking reduction with an electronic nicotine delivery sys-
mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A. 2013;1291:48–55. tem. Am J Health Beh. 2014;38:265–274.
43. Bahl V, Lin S, Xu N, Davis B, Wang YH, Talbot P. Comparison of elec- 66. Sciencelab.com, Inc. Material Data Safety Sheet: Propylene Glycol.
tronic cigarette refill fluid cytotoxicity using embryonic and adult models. Updated May 21, 2013. Sciencelab.com, Inc., Houston, TX.
Reprod Toxicol. 2012;34:529–537. 67. Dow Chemical Co. Product Safety Assessment (PSA): propylene glycol.
44. Romagna G, Allifranchini E, Bocchietto E, Todeschi S, Esposito M, 2013. http://www.dow.com/productsafety/finder/prog.htm#HealthInfo.
Farsalinos KE. Cytotoxicity evaluation of electronic cigarette vapor Accessed November 21, 2013.
extract on cultured mammalian fibroblasts (ClearStream-LIFE): compari- 68. The American Chemistry Council. Propylene glycol: considerations
son with tobacco cigarette smoke extract. Inhal Toxicol. 2013;25:354–361. against use in theatrical fogs. July 2001. http://www.lyondellbasell.com/
45. Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Allifranchini E, Ripamonti E, Bocchietto E, techlit/techlit/2280.pdf. Accessed November 21, 2013.
Todeschi S, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, Voudris V. Comparison of the 69. Laino T, Tuma C, Moor P, Martin E, Stolz S, Curioni A. Mechanisms of pro-
cytotoxic potential of cigarette smoke and electronic cigarette vapour pylene glycol and triacetin pyrolysis. J Phys Chem A. 2012;116:4602–4609.
extract on cultured myocardial cells. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 70. US Environmental Protection Agency. Acrolein. http://www.epa.gov/
2013;10:5146–5162. ttnatw01/hlthef/acrolein.html. Accessed November 24, 2013.
46. Schripp T, Markewitz D, Uhde E, Salthammer T. Does e-cigarette con- 71. Henderson TR, Clark CR, Marshall TC, Hanson RL, CH H. Heat degrada-
sumption cause passive vaping? Indoor Air. 2013;23:25–31. tion studies of solar heat transfer fluids Solar Energy. 1981;27:121–128.
47. Flouris AD, Chorti MS, Poulianiti KP, Jamurtas AZ, Kostikas K, 72. Chen IL. FDA summary of adverse events on electronic cigarettes.
Tzatzarakis MN, Wallace Hayes A, Tsatsakis AM, Koutedakis Y. Acute Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:615–616.
impact of active and passive electronic cigarette smoking on serum coti- 73. CBS News. Electronic cigarette explodes in man’s mouth, causes serious
nine and lung function. Inhal Toxicol. 2013;25:91–101. injuries. February 16, 2012. http://www.cbsnews.com/news/electronic-
48. Armitage AK, Dollery CT, George CF, Houseman TH, Lewis PJ, Turner cigarette-explodes-in-mans-mouth-causes-serious-injuries/. Accessed
DM. Absorption and metabolism of nicotine from cigarettes. Br Med J. November 24, 2013.
1975;4:313–316. 74. Strickland J. Woman says e-cigarette exploded, shot flames 4 feet across
49. Czogala J, Goniewicz ML, Fidelus B, Zielinska-Danch W, Travers living room. WSB-TV Atlanta. 2013. http://www.wsbtv.com/news/news/
MJ, Sobczak A. Secondhand exposure to vapors from electronic ciga- local/woman-says-e-cigarette-exploded-shot-flames-4-feet/nZkCX/.
rettes [published online ahead of print December 11, 2013]. Nicotine 75. Vardavas CI, Anagnostopoulos N, Kougias M, Evangelopoulou V,
Tob Res. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntt203. http://ntr.oxfordjournals.org/content/ Connolly GN, Behrakis PK. Short-term pulmonary effects of using an
early/2013/12/10/ntr.ntt203.long. Accessed February 12, 2014. electronic cigarette: impact on respiratory flow resistance, impedance, and
50. Ostro B, Feng WY, Broadwin R, Green S, Lipsett M. The effects of com- exhaled nitric oxide. Chest. 2012;141:1400–1406.
ponents of fine particulate air pollution on mortality in California: results 76. Flouris AD, Poulianiti KP, Chorti MS, Jamurtas AZ, Kouretas D, Owolabi
from CALFINE. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:13–19. EO, Tzatzarakis MN, Tsatsakis AM, Koutedakis Y. Acute effects of elec-
51. Secondhand Smoke Exposure and Cardiovascular Effects: Making Sense tronic and tobacco cigarette smoking on complete blood count. Food
of the Evidence. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 2010. Chem Toxicol. 2012;50:3600–3603.
52. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, Diez- 77. McAuley TR, Hopke PK, Zhao J, Babaian S. Comparison of the effects of
Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker RV, Mittleman MA. Particulate e-cigarette vapor and cigarette smoke on indoor air quality. Inhal Toxicol.
matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: an update to the sci- 2012;24:850–857.
entific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 78. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. The Regulation
2010;121:2331–2378. of Nicotine Containing Products (NCPS). London, UK: Public Summary
53. Pope CA 3rd, Burnett RT, Krewski D, Jerrett M, Shi Y, Calle EE, Thun Report, Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency; June
MJ. Cardiovascular mortality and exposure to airborne fine particulate 12, 2013.
matter and cigarette smoke: shape of the exposure-response relationship. 79. Grana R, Popova L, Ling P. A longitudinal analysis of electronic ciga-
Circulation. 2009;120:941–948. rette use and smoking cessation [published online ahead of print March
54. Mehta S, Shin H, Burnett R, North T, Cohen AJ. Ambient particulate air 24, 2014]. JAMA Int Med. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.187.
pollution and acute lower respiratory infections: a systematic review and http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1846627.
implications for estimating the global burden of disease. Air Qual Atmos Accessed March 24, 2014.
Health. 2013:1–15. 80. Vickerman KA, Carpenter KM, Altman T, Nash CM, Zbikowski SM. Use
55. Fuoco FC, Buonanno G, Stabile L, Vigo P. Influential parameters on par- of electronic cigarettes among state tobacco cessation quitline callers.
ticle concentration and size distribution in the mainstream of e-cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:1787–1791.
Environ Pollut. 2014;184:523–529. 81. Choi K, Forster JL. Response to Letter to the Editor Regarding “Beliefs
56. Ingebrethsen BJ, Cole SK, Alderman SL. Electronic cigarette aerosol par- and Experimentation with Electronic Cigarettes: A Prospective Analysis
ticle size distribution measurements. Inhal Toxicol. 2012;24:976–984. Among Young Adults.” Am J Prev Med. In press.
57. Zhang Y, Sumner W, Chen DR. In vitro particle size distributions in elec- 82. Popova L, Ling PM. Alternative tobacco product use and smoking cessa-
tronic and conventional cigarette aerosols suggest comparable deposition tion: a national study. Am J Public Health. 2013;103:923–930.
patterns. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:501–508. 83. Polosa R, Caponnetto P, Morjaria JB, Papale G, Campagna D, Russo C.
58. Williams M, Villarreal A, Bozhilov K, Lin S, Talbot P. Metal and silicate Effect of an electronic nicotine delivery device (e-cigarette) on smoking
particles including nanoparticles are present in electronic cigarette carto- reduction and cessation: a prospective 6-month pilot study. BMC Public
mizer fluid and aerosol. PLoS One. 2013;8:e57987. Health. 2011;11:786.
59. Vansickel AR, Cobb CO, Weaver MF, Eissenberg TE. A clinical labo- 84. Caponnetto P, Campagna D, Cibella F, Morjaria JB, Caruso M, Russo C,
ratory model for evaluating the acute effects of electronic “cigarettes”: Polosa R. EffiCiency and Safety of an eLectronic cigAreTte (ECLAT) as
nicotine delivery profile and cardiovascular and subjective effects. Cancer tobacco cigarettes substitute: a prospective 12-month randomized control
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1945–1953. design study. PLoS One. 2013;8:e66317.
60. Bullen C, McRobbie H, Thornley S, Glover M, Lin R, Laugesen M. Effect 85. Caponnetto P, Auditore R, Russo C, Cappello GC, Polosa R. Impact of an
of an electronic nicotine delivery device (e cigarette) on desire to smoke electronic cigarette on smoking reduction and cessation in schizophrenic
and withdrawal, user preferences and nicotine delivery: randomised smokers: a prospective 12-month pilot study. Int J Environ Res Public
cross-over trial. Tob Control. 2010;19:98–103. Health. 2013;10:446–461.
61. Etter JF, Bullen C. Saliva cotinine levels in users of electronic cigarettes. 86. Bullen C, Howe C, Laugesen M, McRobbie H, Parag V, Williman J,
Eur Respir J. 2011;38:1219–1220. Walker N. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised con-
62. Vansickel AR, Eissenberg T. Electronic cigarettes: effective nicotine deliv- trolled trial. Lancet. 2013;382:1629–1637.
ery after acute administration. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:267–270. 87. Polosa R, Morjaria JB, Caponnetto P, Campagna D, Russo C, Alamo A,
63. Dawkins L, Corcoran O. Acute electronic cigarette use: nicotine delivery Amaradio M, Fisichella A. Effectiveness and tolerability of electronic
and subjective effects in regular users. Psychopharmacology. 2013:1–7. cigarette in real-life: a 24-month prospective observational study. Intern
64. Dawkins L, Turner J, Hasna S, Soar K. The electronic-cigarette: effects Emerg Med. 2013:1–10.
on desire to smoke, withdrawal symptoms and cognition. Addict Behav. 88. Hughes JR, Shiffman S, Callas P, Zhang J. A meta-analysis of the efficacy
2012;37:970–973. of over-the-counter nicotine replacement. Tob Control. 2003;12:21–27.1986 Circulation May 13, 2014
89. Eissenberg T. Electronic nicotine delivery devices: ineffective nicotine public health policy [published online ahead of print January 22,
delivery and craving suppression after acute administration. Tob Control. 2014]. Tob Control. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051502. http://
2010;19:87–88. tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2014/01/22/tobaccocontrol-
90. Moore D, Aveyard P, Connock M, Wang D, Fry-Smith A, Barton P. 2013-051502.long. Accessed February 2, 2014.
Effectiveness and safety of nicotine replacement therapy assisted 109. US Department of Health and Human Services. How Tobacco
reduction to stop smoking: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for
2009;338:b1024. Smoking-Attributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon General.
91. Godtfredsen N, Osler M, Vestbo J, Andersen I, Prescott E. Smoking Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
reduction, smoking cessation, and incidence of fatal and non-fatal Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease
myocardial infarction in Denmark 1976–1998: a pooled cohort study. Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2010.
J Epidemiol Commun Health. 2003;57:412–416. 110. Samuels B, Glantz SA. The politics of local tobacco control. JAMA.
92. Jha P, Ramasundarahettige C, Landsman V, Rostron B, Thun M, Anderson 1991;266:2110–2117.
RN, McAfee T, Peto R. 21st-Century hazards of smoking and benefits of 111. Fallin A, Grana R, Glantz SA. “To quarterback behind the scenes,
cessation in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:341–350. third-party efforts”: the tobacco industry and the tea party [published
93. Gerber Y, Myers V, Goldbourt U. Smoking reduction at midlife and life- online ahead of print February 20, 2013]. Tob Control. doi:10.1136/
time mortality risk in men: a prospective cohort study. Am J Epidemiol. tobaccocontrol-2012–050815. http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/
2012;175:1006–1012. early/2013/02/20/tobaccocontrol-2012-050815.long.
94. Tverdal A, Bjartveit K. Health consequences of reduced daily cigarette 112. Higgins A. Aided by army of “’vapers,” e-cigarette indus-
consumption. Tob Control. 2006;15:472–480. try woos and wins Europe. The New York Times. November 9,
95. US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences 2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/10/world/europe/aided-by-
of Smoking: 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. army-of-vapers-e-cigarette-industry-woos-and-wins-europe.
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&seid=auto&smid=tw-nytimeshealth.
Center on Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Accessed November 12, 2013.
Smoking and Health; 2014. 113. Sottera, Inc. v Food & Drug Administration, 627 F.3d 891 (2010).
96. Barnoya J, Glantz SA. Cardiovascular effects of secondhand smoke: 114. American Nonsmokers’ Rights Foundation. U.S. state and local laws
nearly as large as smoking. Circulation. 2005;111:2684–2698. regulating use of electronic cigarettes October 1, 2013. http://no-smoke.
97. Bjartveit K, Tverdal A. Health consequences of smoking 1-4 cigarettes org/pdf/ecigslaws.pdf. Accessed December 14, 2013.
per day. Tob Control. 2005;14:315–320. 115. European Parliament and European Council of the European
98. Thun MJ, Carter BD, Feskanich D, Freedman ND, Prentice R, Lopez Union. Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on
AD, Hartge P, Gapstur SM. 50-Year trends in smoking-related mortality the Approximation of the Laws, Regulations, and Administrative
in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:351–364. Provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, pre-
99. Lynch SM, Vrieling A, Lubin JH, Kraft P, Mendelsohn JB, Hartge P, sentation and sale of tobacco and related products. Pe-Cons No/
Canzian F, Steplowski E, Arslan AA, Gross M, Helzlsouer K, Jacobs EJ, Yy - 2012/0366 (Cod). February 26, 2014. http://www.europarl.
LaCroix A, Petersen G, Zheng W, Albanes D, Amundadottir L, Bingham europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=REPORT&reference=A7-2013-
SA, Boffetta P, Boutron-Ruault MC, Chanock SJ, Clipp S, Hoover RN, 0276&format=XML&language=EN. Accessed March 25, 2014..
Jacobs K, Johnson KC, Kooperberg C, Luo J, Messina C, Palli D, Patel 116. European Commission. Memo: questions & answers: new rules for
AV, Riboli E, Shu XO, Rodriguez Suarez L, Thomas G, Tjønneland A, tobacco products. March 5, 2014. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_
Tobias GS, Tong E, Trichopoulos D, Virtamo J, Ye W, Yu K, Zeleniuch- MEMO-14-134_en.htm. Accessed March 5, 2014.
Jacquette A, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, S tolzenberg-Solomon RZ. 117. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. The regulation of
Cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pan- nicotine containing products: questions and answers. 2013. http://www.
creatic cancer cohort consortium. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;170:403–413. mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/comms-ic/documents/w ebsiteresources/
100. Pandeya N, Williams GM, Sadhegi S, Green AC, Webb PM, Whiteman con286835.pdf. Accessed October 4, 2013.
DC. Associations of duration, intensity, and quantity of smoking with 118. Action on Smoking and Health. Electronic cigarettes. ash briefing. June
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Am J 2013. http://www.ash.org.uk/files/documents/ASH_715.pdf. Accessed
Epidemiol. 2008;168:105–114. October 4, 2013.
101. Vineis P, Kogevinas M, Simonato L, Brennan P, Boffetta P. L evelling-off 119. McKee M. E-cigarettes and the marketing push that surprised everyone.
of the risk of lung and bladder cancer in heavy smokers: an analysis BMJ. 2013;347:f5780.
based on multicentric case-control studies and a metabolic interpreta- 120. Dwyer JB, Broide RS, Leslie FM. Nicotine and brain development. Birth
tion. Mutat Res. 2000;463:103–110. Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2008;84:30–44.
102. Doll R, Peto R. Cigarette smoking and bronchial carcinoma: dose and 121. Liao C-Y, Chen Y-J, Lee J-F, Lu C-L, Chen C-H. Cigarettes and the
time relationships among regular smokers and lifelong non-smokers. developing brain: picturing nicotine as a neuroteratogen using clinical
J Epidemiol Community Health. 1978;32:303–313. and preclinical studies. Tzu Chi Med J. 2012;24:157–161.
103. Flanders WD, Lally CA, Zhu BP, Henley SJ, Thun MJ. Lung cancer 122. Lichtensteiger W, Ribary U, Schlumpf M, Odermatt B, Widmer HR.
mortality in relation to age, duration of smoking, and daily cigarette Prenatal adverse effects of nicotine on the developing brain. Prog Brain
consumption: results from Cancer Prevention Study II. Cancer Res. Res. 1988;73:137–157.
2003;63:6556–6562. 123. Longo CA, Fried PA, Cameron I, Smith AM. The long-term effects of
104. Fiore M. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update: Clinical prenatal nicotine exposure on response inhibition: an fMRI study of
Practice Guideline. Darby, PA: DIANE Publishing; 2008. young adults. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2013;39:9–18.
105. Esterl M. Lorillard isn’t backing away from menthol or e-cigarettes. Wall 124. US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences
Street J. August 27, 2013. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001 of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon
424127887324906304579038844211701578. Accessed November 24, General Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services
2013. PHS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
106. Kessler MS. E-cigarettes could reduce harm: opposing view: regula- Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office of Smoking
tory actions, including tax policy should encourage cigarette smokers and Health; 2006.
to switch. USA Today. September 22, 2013. http://www.usatoday.com/ 125. Fichtenberg CM, Glantz SA. Effect of smoke-free workplaces on smok-
story/opinion/2013/09/22/electronic-cigarettes-blu-ecigs-editorials- ing behaviour: systematic review. BMJ. 2002;325:188.
debates/2850859/. Accessed November 24, 2013. 126. Tan CE, Glantz SA. Association between smoke-free legislation and
107. Peeters S, Gilmore AB. Transnational tobacco company interests in hospitalizations for cardiac, cerebrovascular, and respiratory diseases: a
smokeless tobacco in Europe: analysis of internal industry documents meta-analysis. Circulation. 2012;126:2177–2183.
and contemporary industry materials. PLoS Med. 2013;10:e1001506.
108. Peeters S, Gilmore AB. Understanding the emergence of the tobacco
industry’s use of the term tobacco harm reduction in order to inform KEY WORDS: adolescent ◼ particulate matter ◼ public policy ◼ smoking