524430
research-article2014 TAW0010.1177/2042098614524430Therapeutic Advances in Drug SafetyKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety Review
Safety evaluation and risk assessment of Ther Adv Drug Saf
2014, Vol. 5(2) 67 –86
electronic cigarettes as tobacco cigarette DOI: 10.1177/
2042098614524430
substitutes: a systematic review © The Author(s), 2014.
Reprints and permissions:
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/
journalsPermissions.nav
Konstantinos E. Farsalinos and Riccardo Polosa
Abstract: Electronic cigarettes are a recent development in tobacco harm reduction. They
are marketed as less harmful alternatives to smoking. Awareness and use of these devices
has grown exponentially in recent years, with millions of people currently using them. This
systematic review appraises existing laboratory and clinical research on the potential risks
from electronic cigarette use, compared with the well-established devastating effects of
smoking tobacco cigarettes. Currently available evidence indicates that electronic cigarettes
are by far a less harmful alternative to smoking and significant health benefits are expected in
smokers who switch from tobacco to electronic cigarettes. Research will help make electronic
cigarettes more effective as smoking substitutes and will better define and further reduce
residual risks from use to as low as possible, by establishing appropriate quality control and
standards.
Keywords: electronic cigarettes, e-liquid, e-vapor, harm reduction, nicotine, safety, tobacco
Introduction distilled water, flavorings (that may or may not be Correspondence to:
Konstantinos E.
Complete tobacco cessation is the best outcome approved for food use) and nicotine. Consumers
Farsalinos, MD
for smokers. However, the powerful addictive (commonly called ‘vapers’) may choose from sev- Onassis Cardiac Surgery
Center, Sygrou 356,
properties of nicotine and the ritualistic behavior eral nicotine strengths, including non-nicotine
Kallithea 17674, Greece
of smoking create a huge hurdle, even for those liquids, and a countless list of flavors; this assort- kfarsalinos@gmail.com
with a strong desire to quit. Until recently, smok- ment is a characteristic feature that distinguishes Riccardo Polosa, PhD
Centro per la Prevenzione
ers were left with just two alternatives: either quit ECs from any other THR products. Since their e Cura del Tabagismo
or suffer the harmful consequences of continued invention in 2003, there has been constant inno- (CPCT) and Institute
of Internal Medicine,
smoking. This gloomy scenario has allowed the vation and development of more efficient and Università di Catania,
smoking pandemic to escalate, with nearly 6 mil- appealing products. Currently, there are mainly Catania, Italy
lion deaths annually and a predicted death toll of three types of devices available [Dawkins, 2013],
1 billion within the 21st century [World Health depicted in Figure 1. (1) First-generation devices,
Organization, 2013]. But a third choice, involving generally mimicking the size and look of regular
the use of alternative and much safer sources of cigarettes and consisting of small lithium batteries
nicotine with the goal to reduce smoking-related and cartomizers (i.e. cartridges, which are usually
diseases is now available: tobacco harm reduction prefilled with a liquid that bathes the atomizer).
(THR) [Rodu and Godshall, 2006]. Batteries may be disposable (to be used once
only) or rechargeable. (2) Second-generation
Electronic cigarettes (ECs) are the newest and devices, consisting mainly of higher-capacity lith-
most promising products for THR [Polosa et al. ium batteries and atomizers with the ability to
2013b]. They are electrically-driven devices con- refill them with liquid (sold in separate bottles).
sisting of the battery part (usually a lithium bat- In the most recent atomizers you can simply
tery), and an atomizer where liquid is stored and change the atomizer head (resistance and wick)
is aerosolized by applying energy and generating while keeping the body of the atomizer, thus
heat to a resistance encircling a wick. The liquid reducing the operating costs. (3) Third-generation
used mainly consists of propylene glycol, glycerol, devices (also called ‘Mods’, from modifications),
http://taw.sagepub.com 67Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
medications for nicotine dependence, whereas
ECs are unique in that they provide rituals asso-
ciated with smoking behavior (e.g. hand-to-
mouth movement, visible ‘smoke’ exhaled) and
sensory stimulation associated with it [Farsalinos
et al. 2013b]. This explains why these products
can be effective in reducing consumption of
tobacco smoking [Bullen et al. 2013; Caponnetto
et al. 2013b; Polosa et al. 2011] and are efficient
as long-term substitutes of conventional ciga-
Figure 1. Examples of electronic cigarette devices rettes [Farsalinos et al. 2013b].
currently available on the market.
Methods
consisting of very large-capacity lithium batteries For this systematic review (Figure 2), we searched
with integrated circuits that allow vapers to the PubMed electronic database by using key-
change the voltage or power (wattage) delivered words related to ECs and/or their combination
to the atomizer. These devices can be combined (e-cigarette, electronic cigarette, electronic nico-
with either second-generation atomizers or with tine delivery systems). We obtained a total of 354
rebuildable atomizers, where the consumers have results, and selected 41 studies we judged relevant
the ability to prepare their own setup of resistance to research on EC safety/risk profile. Reference
and wick. lists from these studies were also examined to
identify relevant articles. We searched additional
Awareness and use (vaping) of ECs has increased information in abstracts presented at scientific
exponentially in recent years. Data obtained from congresses (respiratory, cardiovascular, tobacco
the HealthStyles survey showed that, in the US, control, toxicology), and in reports of chemical
awareness of ECs rose from 40.9–57.9% from analyses on EC samples that were available online.
2010 to 2011, with EC use rising from 3.3–6.2% We also looked for selected studies on chemicals
over the same time period [King et al. 2013]. In related to EC ingredients (e.g. nicotine, propyl-
the United Kingdom, EC use in regular smokers ene glycol, glycerol, cinnamaldehyde, microparti-
increased from 2.7% in 2010 to 6.7% in 2012 cles emission, etc.), but not specifically evaluated
[Dockrell et al. 2013]. Similar findings were in EC research. In total, 97 publications were
obtained from the International Tobacco Control found, from which 15 chemical analyses of single
Four-Country Survey [Adkison et al. 2013]. A or a limited number of EC samples were excluded
recent prospective study in Swiss army recruits because they were discussed in a review paper
showed that 12% of smokers who tried ECs pro- [Cahn and Siegel, 2011]. In total, 114 studies are
gressed to daily use [Douptcheva et al. 2013]. It cited in this paper.
must be noted that this increase in EC use has
occurred despite the concerns raised by public
health authorities about the safety and appropri- Risk differences compared with
ateness of using these products as alternatives to conventional cigarettes and the issue of
smoking [National Association of Attorneys nicotine
General, 2013; Food and Drug Administration, Conventional cigarettes are the most common
2009; Mayers, 2009]. form of nicotine intake. Smoking-related diseases
are pathophysiologically attributed to oxidative
The popularity of ECs may be due to their ability stress, activation of inflammatory pathways and
to deal both with the physical (i.e. nicotine) and the toxic effect of more than 4000 chemicals and
the behavioral component of smoking addiction. carcinogens present in tobacco smoke
In particular, sensory stimulation [Rose and [Environmental Protection Agency, 1992]. In
Levin, 1991] and simulation of smoking behavior addition, each puff contains >1 × 1015 free radi-
and cigarette manipulation [Hajek et al. 1989] cals [Pryor and Stone, 1993]. All of these chemi-
are important determinants of a product’s effec- cals are emitted mostly during the combustion
tiveness in reducing or completely substituting process, which is absent in ECs. Although the
smoking. These features are generally absent in addictive potential of nicotine and related com-
nicotine replacement therapies (NRTs) and oral pounds is largely documented [Guillem et al.
68 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Figure 2. Methodology for literature research and selection of studies.
2005], much less dissemination has been given to to cardiovascular diseases or other serious side
the notion that nicotine does not contribute to effects [Murray et al. 1996]. A meta-analysis of 35
smoking-related diseases. It is not classified as a clinical trials found no evidence of cardiovascular
carcinogen by the International Agency for or other life-threatening adverse effects caused by
Research on Cancer [WHO-IARC, 2004] and nicotine intake [Greenland et al. 1998]. Even in
does not promote obstructive lung disease. A patients with established cardiovascular disease,
major misconception, commonly supported even nicotine use in the form of NRTs does not
by physicians, is that nicotine promotes cardio- increase cardiovascular risk [Woolf et al. 2012;
vascular disease. However, it has been established Benowitz and Gourlay, 1997]. It is anticipated
that nicotine itself has minimal effect in initiating that any product delivering nicotine without
and promoting atherosclerotic heart disease involving combustion, such as the EC, would
[Ambrose and Barua, 2004]. It does not promote confer a significantly lower risk compared with
platelet aggregation [Zevin et al. 1998], does not conventional cigarettes and to other nicotine con-
affect coronary circulation [Nitenberg and taining combustible products.
Antony, 1999] and does not adversely alter the
lipid profile [Ludviksdottir et al. 1999]. An obser- The importance of using nicotine in the long-
vational study of more than 33,000 smokers term was recognized several years ago by Russell,
found no evidence of increased risk for myocar- indicating that the potential of nicotine delivery
dial infarction or acute stroke after NRT sub- systems as long-term alternatives to tobacco
scription, although follow up was only 56 days should be explored in order to make the elimina-
[Hubbard et al. 2005]. Up to 5 years of nicotine tion of tobacco a realistic future target [Russell,
gum use in the Lung Health Study was unrelated 1991]. However, current regulations restrict the
http://taw.sagepub.com 69Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
long-term use of pharmaceutical or recreational body of knowledge and also because the product
nicotine products (such as snus) [Le Houezec itself is undergoing constant development.
et al. 2011]. In other words, nicotine intake has
been demonized, although evidence suggests that, Existing studies about the safety/risk profile of
besides being useful in smoking cessation, it may ECs can be divided into chemical, toxicological
even have beneficial effects in a variety of disor- and clinical studies (Table 1). Obviously, clinical
ders such as Parkinson’s disease [Nielsen et al. studies are the most informative, but also the
2013], depression [McClernon et al. 2006], most demanding because of several methodologi-
dementia [Sahakian et al. 1989] and ulcerative cal, logistical, ethical and financial challenges. In
colitis [Guslandi, 1999]. Obviously, the addictive particular, exploring safety/risk profile in cohorts
potential is an important factor in any decision to of well-characterized users in the long-term is
endorse nicotine administration; however, it required to address the potential of future disease
should be considered as slight ‘collateral damage’ development, but it would take hundreds of users
with minimal impact to vapers’ health compared to be followed for a substantial number of years
with the tremendous benefit of eliminating all before any conclusions are made. Therefore, most
disease-related substances coming from tobacco research is currently focused on in vitro effects,
smoking. In fact, smokers are already addicted to with clinical studies confined into evaluation of
nicotine; therefore the use of a ‘cleaner’ form of short-term use or pathophysiological mechanisms
nicotine delivery would not represent any addi- of smoking-related diseases.
tional risk of addiction. Surveys have shown that
ECs are used as long-term substitutes to smoking
[Dawkins et al. 2013; Etter and Bullen, 2012]. Chemical studies
Although consumers try to reduce nicotine use Chemical studies are relatively simple and cheap
with ECs, many are unable to completely stop its to perform and provide quick results. However,
intake, indicating an important role for nicotine there are several disadvantages with this approach.
in the ECs’ effectiveness as a smoking substitute Research is usually focused on the known specific
[Farsalinos et al. 2013b]. chemicals (generally those known to be toxic from
studies of cigarette smoke) and fails to address
Nicotine overdose or intoxication is unlikely to unknown, potentially toxic contaminants that
occur with vaping, since the amount consumed could be detected in the liquid or the emitted aer-
[Farsalinos et al. 2013c] and absorbed [Nides osol. Problems may also arise from the detection
et al. 2014; Dawkins and Corcoran, 2013] is quite of the chemicals in flavors. Such substances,
low. Moreover, although not yet proven, it is although approved for use in the food industry,
expected that vapers will self-titrate their nicotine have largely unknown effects when heated and
intake in a similar way to tobacco cigarettes inhaled; thus, information on the presence of such
[Benowitz et al. 1998]. Last, but not least, there is substances is difficult to interpret in terms of
evidence suggesting that nicotine cannot be deliv- in vivo effects. In fact, chemical studies do not pro-
ered as fast and effectively from ECs compared to vide any objective information about the effects of
tobacco cigarettes [Farsalinos et al. 2014]. use; they can only be used to calculate the risk
Therefore, it seems that ECs have a huge theoreti- based on theoretical models and on already
cal advantage in terms of health risks compared established safety levels determined by health
with conventional cigarettes due to the absence of authorities. An overview of the chemical studies
toxic chemicals that are generated in vast quanti- performed on ECs is displayed in Table 2.
ties by combustion. Furthermore, nicotine deliv-
ery by ECs is unlikely to represent a significant Laugesen performed the first studies evaluating
safety issue, particularly when considering they the chemical composition of EC aerosols
are intended to replace tobacco cigarettes, the [Laugesen, 2008, 2009]. The temperature of the
most efficient nicotine delivery product. resistance of the tested EC was 54oC during acti-
vation, which is approximately 5–10% of the tem-
perature of a burning tobacco cigarette. Toxic
Studies on the safety/risk profile of ECs chemicals such as heavy metals, carcinogenic
Findings on the safety/risk profile of ECs have polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and phenols
just started to accumulate. However, this research were not detected, with the exception of trivial
must be considered work in progress given that amounts of mercury (0.17 ng per EC) and traces
the safety/risk of any product reflects an evolving of formaldehyde and acetaldehyde. Laugesen
70 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Table 1. Types of studies performed to determine safety and to estimate risk from EC use.
Type of studies Research subject Advantages Disadvantages
Chemical Evaluate the chemical Easier and faster to Usually targeted on specific chemicals.
studies composition of liquids perform. Less expensive. Unknown effects of flavorings when inhaled.
and/or aerosol. Examine Could realistically No validated protocols for vapor production.
environmental exposure be implemented for Provide no objective evidence about the end
(passive ‘vaping’). regulatory purposes. results (effects) of use (besides by applying
theoretical models).
Toxicological Evaluate the effects on cell Provide some information Difficult to interpret the results in terms of
studies cultures or experimental about the effects from use. human in vivo effects. More expensive than
animals. chemical studies. Need to test aerosol and not
liquid.
Standards for exposure protocols have not been
clearly defined.
Clinical studies Studies on human in vivo Provide definite and Difficult and expensive to perform. Long-term
effects. objective evidence about follow up is needed due to the expected lag
the effects of use. from initiation of use to possible development
of any clinically evident disease. For now,
limited to acute effects from use.
evaluated emissions based on a toxicant emissions compared with EC use (Table 3). Etter and col-
score and reported a score of 0 in ECs compared leagues evaluated the accuracy of nicotine labe-
with a score of 100–134 for tobacco cigarettes ling and the presence of nicotine impurities and
(Figure 3). The US Food and Drug Administration degradation products in 20 EC liquid samples
(FDA) also performed chemical analyses on 18 [Etter et al. 2013]. They found that nicotine levels
commercially available products in 2009 were 85–121% of what was labeled, while nico-
[Westenberger, 2009]. They detected the pres- tine degradation products were present at levels
ence of tobacco-specific nitrosamines (TSNAs) of 0–4.4%. Although in some samples the levels
but did not declare the levels found. Small were higher than those specified in European
amounts of diethylene glycol were also found in Pharmacopoeia, they are not expected to cause
one sample, which was unlikely to cause any harm any measurable harm to users.
from normal use. Another study identified small
amounts of amino-tandalafil and rimonambant in Besides the evaluation for the presence of TSNAs,
EC liquids [Hadwiger et al. 2010]. Subsequently, analyses have been performed for the detection of
several laboratories performed similar tests, carbonyl compounds. It is known that the thermal
mostly on liquids, with Cahn and Siegel publish- degradation of propylene glycol and glycerol can
ing a review on the chemical analyses of ECs and lead to the emission of toxic compounds such as
comparing the findings with tobacco cigarettes aldehydes [Antal et al. 1985; Stein et al. 1983].
and other tobacco products [Cahn and Siegel, Goniewicz and colleagues evaluated the emission
2011]. They reported that TSNA levels were simi- of 15 carbonyls from 12 brands of ECs (mostly
lar to those measured in pharmaceutical NRTs. first-generation) [Goniewicz et al. 2013]. In order
The authors concluded that, based on chemical to produce vapor, researchers used a smoking
analysis, ECs are far less harmful compared with machine and followed a regime of 1.8-second
tobacco cigarettes. The most comprehensive puffs with a very short 10-second interpuff inter-
study on TSNAs has been performed recently by val, which does not represent realistic use
a South Korean group, evaluating 105 liquids [Farsalinos et al. 2013c]; although the puff dura-
obtained from local retailers [Kim and Shin, tion was low, interpuff interval was remarkably
2013]. On average, they found 12.99 ηg TSNAs short, which could potentially lead to overheating.
per ml of liquid, with the amount of daily expo- In addition, the same puff number was used in all
sure to the users estimated to be similar to users devices tested, although there was a significant
of NRTs [Farsalinos et al. 2013d]. The estimated difference in the design and liquid content
daily exposure to nitrosamines from tobacco ciga- between devices. Despite these limitations, out of
rettes (average consumption of 15 cigarettes per 15 carbonyls, only 3 were detected (formalde-
day) is estimated to be up to 1800 times higher hyde, acetaldehyde and acrolein); levels were
http://taw.sagepub.com 71Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
Table 2. Summary of chemical toxicity findings.
Study What was investigated? What were the key findings?
Liquid Vapor
Laugesen Evaluation of 62 toxicants in N/A No acrolein, but small quantities of
[2009] the EC vapour from Ruyan 16 acetaldehyde and formaldehyde found.
mg and mainstream tobacco Traces of TSNAs (NNN, NNK, and NAT)
smoke using a standard detected. CO, metals, carcinogenic PAHs
smoking machine protocol. and phenols not found in EC vapour.
Acetaldehyde and formaldehyde from
tobacco smoke were 55 and 5 times higher,
respectively.
Westenberger Evaluation of toxicants in EC TSNAs and certain tobacco N/A
[2009] cartridges from two popular specific impurities were
US brands. detected in both products at
very low levels. Diethylene
glycol was identified in one
cartridge.
Hadwiger Evaluation of four refill Small amounts of amino- N/A
et al. [2010] solutions and six replacement tandalafil and rimonambant
cartridges advertised present in all products tested.
as containing Cialis or
rimonambant.
Cahn and Overview of 16 chemical TSNAs levels in ECs 500- to 1400-fold lower than those in conventional
Siegel [2011] toxicity studies of EC liquids/ cigarettes and similar to those in NRTs. Other chemicals found very low
vapours. levels, which are not expected to result in significant harm.
Pellegrino Evaluation of PM fractions and N/A PM fractions were found, but levels were 6–
et al. [2012] PAHs in the vapour generated 18 times lower compared with conventional
from cartomizers of an Italian cigarettes. Traces of PAHs detected.
EC brand.
Kim and Shin TSNAs (NNN, NNK, NAT, and Total TSNAs averaged N/A
[2013] NAB) content in 105 refill 12.99 ng/ml EC liquid; daily
liquids from 11 EC brands total TSNA exposure from
purchased in Korean shops. conventional cigarettes
estimated to be up to 1800
times higher.
Etter et al. Nicotine degradation The levels of nicotine N/A
[2013] products, ethylene glycol and degradation products
diethylene glycol evaluation represented 0–4.4% of those
of 20 EC refill liquids from 10 for nicotine, but for most
popular brands samples the level was 1–2%.
Neither ethylene glycol
nor diethylene glycol were
detected.
Goniewicz Vapours generated from 12 N/A Carbonyl compounds (formaldehyde,
et al. [2013] brands of ECs and a medicinal acetaldehyde and acrolein), VOCs (toluene
nicotine inhaler using a and trace levels of xylene), trace levels
modified smoking machine of TSNAs (NNN and NNK) and very low
protocol levels of metals (cadmium, nickel and lead)
were found in almost all examined EC
vapours. Trace amounts of formaldehyde,
acetaldehyde, cadmium, nickel and lead
were also detected from the Nicorette
inhalator. Compared with conventional
cigarette, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde and
acrolein were 9–450 times lower; toluene
levels 120 times lower; and NNN and NNK
levels 380 and 40 times lower respectively.
(Continued)
72 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Table 2. (Continued)
Study What was investigated? What were the key findings?
Liquid Vapor
Williams et al. Vapour generated from N/A Trace levels of several metals (including
[2013] cartomizers of a popular tin, copper, silver, iron, nickel, aluminium,
EC brand using a standard chromium, lead) were found, some of them
smoking machine protocol at higher level compared with conventional
cigarettes. Silica particles were also
detected. Number of microparticles from
10 EC puffs were 880 times lower compared
with one tobacco cigarette.
Burstyn Systematic review of 35 No evidence of levels of contaminants that may be associated with risk to
[2014] chemical toxicity studies/ health. These include acrolein, formaldehyde, TSNAs, and metals. Concern
technical reports of EC about contamination of the liquid by a nontrivial quantity of ethylene glycol or
liquids/vapours. diethylene glycol remains confined to a single sample of an early technology
product and has not been replicated.
Abbreviations. CO, carbon monoxide; EC, electronic cigarette; NAT, N-Nitrosoanatabine; NNK, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone;
NNN, N-Nitrosonornicotine; PAHs, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; PM, particulate matter; TSNAs, tobacco-specific nitrosamines; VOCs, vola-
tile organic carbons.
nickel, cadmium and lead emitted [Goniewicz
et al. 2013]; the levels of nickel were similar to
those present in a pharmaceutical nicotine inhala-
tor, while lead and cadmium were present at 2–3
times higher levels compared with the inhalator.
Still, the absolute levels were very low (few nano-
grams per 150 puffs). Williams et al. [2013]
focused their research on the presence of heavy
Figure 3. Toxic emissions score, adjusted for metals and silicate particles emitted from ECs.
nicotine, for electronic cigarette and popular cigarette They tested poor quality first-generation cart-
brands. (Reproduced with permission from Laugesen omisers and found several metals emitted in the
[2009]). aerosol of the EC, specifying that in some cases
the levels were higher compared with conven-
tional cigarettes. As mentioned earlier, it is not
9–450 times lower compared with emissions from unusual to find trace levels of metals in the vapor
tobacco cigarettes (derived from existing litera- generated by these products under experimental
ture but not tested in the same experiment). conditions that bear little relevance to their nor-
Formaldehyde and acetaldehyde were also emit- mal use; however, it is unlikely that such small
ted from the nicotine inhalator, although at lower amounts pose a serious threat to users’ health.
levels. In addition, they examined for the presence Even if all the aerosol was absorbed by the con-
of 11 volatile organic carbons and found only sumer (which is not the case since most of the
trace levels of toluene (at levels from 0.2–6.3 µg aerosol is visibly exhaled), an average user would
per 150 puffs) and xylene (from 0.1–0.2 µg per be exposed to 4–40 times lower amounts for most
150 puffs) in 10 of the samples; toluene levels metals than the maximum daily dose allowance
were 120 times lower compared with tobacco cig- from impurities in medicinal products [US
arettes (again derived from existing literature but Pharmacopeia, 2013]. Silicate particles were also
not tested in the same experiment). found in the EC aerosol. Such particles come
from the wick material, however the authors did
Given that ECs have several metal parts in direct not clarify whether crystalline silica oxide parti-
contact with the e-liquid, it is quite obvious to cles were found, which are responsible for respira-
expect some contamination with metals in the tory disease. In total, the number of microparticles
vapor. Goniewicz and colleagues examined sam- (< 1000 nm) estimated to be inhaled by EC users
ples for the presence of 12 metals and found from 10 puffs were 880 times lower compared
http://taw.sagepub.com 73Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
Table 3. Levels of nitrosamines found in electronic and tobacco cigarettes. Prepared based on information from Laugesen [2009],
Cahn and Siegel [2011] and Kim and Shin [2013].
Product Total nitrosamines levels (ng) Daily exposure (ng) Ratio4
Electronic cigarette (per ml) 13 521 1
Nicotine gum (per piece) 2 482 0.92
Winston (per cigarette) 3365 50 4753 971
Newport (per cigarette) 3885 50 7753 976
Marlboro (per cigarette) 6260 93 9003 1806
Camel (per cigarette) 5191 77 8653 1497
1Based on average daily use of 4ml liquid
2Based on maximum recommended consumption of 24 pieces per day
3Based on consumption of 15 cigarettes per day
4 Difference (number-fold) between electronic cigarette and all other products in daily exposure to nitrosamines
with one tobacco cigarette. Similar findings con- Toxicological studies
cerning microparticles were reported by Pellegrino To date, only a handful of toxicological studies
and colleagues who found that, for each particu- have been performed on ECs, mostly cytotoxicity
late matter fraction, conventional cigarettes studies on established cell lines. The cytotoxicity
released 6–18 times higher amounts compared approach also has its flaws. Findings cannot be
with the EC tested [Pellegrino et al. 2012]. directly applied to the in vivo situation and there
is always the risk of over- (as well as under-)esti-
Burstyn has recently reviewed current data on the mating the interpretation of the toxic effects in
chemistry of aerosols and the liquids of ECs these investigational models. An ample degree of
(including reports which were not peer-reviewed) results variability is to be expected from different
and estimated the risk to consumers based on cell lines and, sometimes, also within the same
workplace exposure standards (i.e. Threshold cell line. Comparing the potential cytotoxicity
Limit Values [TLVs]) [Burstyn, 2014]. After effects of EC vapor with those resulting from the
reviewing all available evidence, the author con- exposure of cigarette smoke should be manda-
cluded that there was no evidence that vaping tory, but standards for vapor production and
produced inhalable exposure to contaminants of exposure protocols have not been clearly defined.
aerosol that would warrant health concerns. He
added that surveillance of use is recommended Bahl and colleagues [Bahl et al. 2012] performed
due to the high levels of propylene glycol and cytotoxicity tests on 36 EC liquids, in human
glycerol inhaled (which are not considered con- embryonic stem cells, mouse neural stem cells
taminants but ingredients of the EC liquid). and human pulmonary fibroblasts and found that
There are limited data on the chronic inhalation stem cells were more sensitive to the effects of the
of these chemicals by humans, although there is liquids, with 15 samples being moderately cyto-
some evidence from toxicological studies (which toxic and 12 samples being highly cytotoxic.
are discussed later in this paper). Propylene glycol and glycerol were not cytotoxic,
but a correlation between cytotoxicity and the
In conclusion, chemical studies have found that number and height of the flavoring peaks in high-
exposure to toxic chemicals from ECs is far lower performance liquid chromatography was noted.
compared with tobacco cigarettes. Besides com- Investigations were just restricted to the effect of
paring the levels of specific chemicals released EC liquids and not to their vapors, thus limiting
from tobacco and ECs, it should be taken into the importance of the study findings; this is not a
consideration that the vast majority of the >4000 trivial issue considering that the intended use of
chemicals present in tobacco smoke are com- these products is by inhalation only and that it is
pletely absent from ECs. Obviously, surveillance unlikely that flavoring substances in the EC liq-
of use is warranted in order to objectively evaluate uids will still be present in the aerosol in the same
the in vivo effects and because the effects of inhal- amount due to differences in evaporation tem-
ing flavoring substances approved for food use are perature [Romagna et al. 2013]. Regrettably, a set
largely unknown. of experiments with cigarette smoke extracts as
74 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
comparator was not included. Of note, the authors extract was diluted to 12.5%. The samples made
emphasized that the study could have underesti- with tobacco leaves were three times less cytotoxic
mated the cytotoxicity by 100 times because when compared with cigarette smoke; this was probably
they added the EC liquids to the cell, medium due to the absence of combustion and the signifi-
final concentration was 1%. However, cells were cantly lower temperature of evaporation in EC use.
cultured for 48 hours with continuous exposure Concerning high-voltage EC use, the authors found
to the liquid, while in real use the lungs come in slightly reduced cell viability without any of the
contact with aerosol instead of liquid, the contact samples being cytotoxic according to the ISO
lasts for 1–2 seconds per puff and most of the 10993-5 definition. Finally, no association between
aerosol is visibly exhaled. Finally, Cinnamon cell survival and the amount of nicotine present in
Ceylon, the liquid found to be mostly cytotoxic in the liquids was noted.
this study, was not a refill liquid but a concen-
trated flavor which is not used in ECs unless it is A recent study evaluated in more detail the cyto-
diluted to 3–5%. toxic potential of eight cinnamon-flavored EC liq-
uids in human embryonic stem cells and human
Romagna and colleagues [Romagna et al. 2013] pulmonary fibroblasts [Behar et al. 2014]. The
performed the first cytotoxicity study of EC vapor authors found that the flavoring substance pre-
on fibroblast cells. They used a standardized ISO dominantly present was cinnamaldehyde, which is
10993-5 protocol, which is used for regulatory approved for food use. They observed significant
purposes of medical devices and products. They cytotoxic effects, mostly on stem cells but also on
tested the vapor of 21 liquid samples containing fibroblasts, with cytotoxicity associated with the
the same amount of nicotine (9 mg/ml), gener- amount of cinnamaldehyde present in the liquid.
ated by a commercially available EC device. Cells However, major methodological issues arose from
were incubated for 24 hours with each of these this study. Once again, cytotoxicity was just
vapors and with smoke from a conventional ciga- restricted to EC liquids and not to their vapors.
rette. Only one sample was found to be margin- Moreover, the authors mentioned that the amount
ally cytotoxic, whereas cigarette smoke was highly of cinnamaldehyde differed between liquids by up
cytotoxic (approximately 795% more cytotoxic), to 100 times, and this raises the suspicion of test-
even when the extract was diluted up to 25% of ing concentrated flavor rather than refills. By
the original concentration. searching the internet and contacting manufactur-
ers, based on the names of samples and suppliers
The same group also investigated the cytotoxic mentioned in the manuscript, it was found that at
potential of 20 EC liquid samples in cardiomyo- least four of their samples were not refills but con-
blasts [Farsalinos et al. 2013a]. Vapor was produced centrated flavors. Surprisingly, the levels of cinna-
by using a commercially available EC device. maldehyde found to be cytotoxic were about 400
Samples contained a wide range of nicotine con- times lower than those currently approved for use
centrations. A base liquid mixture of propylene gly- [Environmental Protection Agency, 2000].
col and glycerol (no nicotine and no flavorings) was
also included as an additional experimental control. Few animal studies have been performed to eval-
Four of the samples examined were made by using uate the potential harm of humectants in EC liq-
cured tobacco leaves in a steeping process, allowing uids (i.e. propylene glycol and glycerol) when
them to impregnate a mixture of propylene glycol given by inhalation. Robertson and colleagues
and glycerol for several days before being filtered tested the effects on primates of inhaling propyl-
and bottled for use. Of note, this was the first study ene glycol vapor for several months and found no
which evaluated a limited number of samples with evidence of toxicity on any organ (including the
an EC device delivering higher voltage and energy lungs) after post-mortem examination of the ani-
to the atomizer (third-generation device). In total, mals [Robertson et al. 1947]. Similar observa-
four samples were found to be cytotoxic; three of tions were made in a recent study in rats and dogs
them were liquids made by using cured tobacco [Werley et al. 2011]. Concerns have been raised in
leaves, with cytotoxicity observed at both 100% human use, based on studies of people exposed to
and 50% extract concentration, while one sample theatrical fog [Varughese et al. 2005; American
(cinnamon flavor) was marginally cytotoxic at Chemistry Council, 2003] or propylene glycol
100% extract concentration only. In comparison, used in the aviation industry [Wieslander et al.
smoke from three tobacco cigarettes was highly 2001]. Irritation of the respiratory tract was
cytotoxic, with toxicity observed even when the found, but no permanent lung injury or other
http://taw.sagepub.com 75Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
long-term health implications were detected. It irritation and dry cough were observed. Farsalinos
should be reminded that, in these circumstances, and colleagues retrospectively evaluated a group
nonpharmaceutical purity propylene glycol is of 111 EC users who had completely quit smoking
used and in some cases oils are added, making it and were daily EC users for a median period of 8
difficult to interpret the results in the context of months [Farsalinos et al. 2013b]. Throat irritation
EC use. Evidence for the potential harm of and cough were the most commonly reported side
inhaled glycerol is sparse. A study using Sprague– effects. Similar findings have been observed in
Dawley rats found minimal to mild squamous surveys [Dawkins et al. 2013; Etter et al. 2011].
metaplasia of the epiglottis epithelium in the However, it is expected that dedicated users who
high-dose group only, without any changes have more positive experiences and fewer side
observed in lungs or other organs [Renne et al. effects compared with the general population par-
1992]. No comparative set of experiments with ticipate in such studies, therefore interpretation
cigarette smoke was included, but it is well known should be done with caution. The only two exist-
that exposure to tobacco smoke in similar animal ing randomized controlled trials have also included
models leads to dramatic changes in the lungs, detailed EC safety analysis. The ECLAT study
liver and kidneys [Czekaj et al. 2002]. [Caponnetto et al. 2013b], a three-arm, con-
trolled, randomized, clinical trial designed to com-
In conclusion, toxicological studies have shown pare efficacy and safety of a first-generation device
significantly lower adverse effects of EC vapor with 7.2, 5.4, or 0 mg nicotine cartridges, reported
compared with cigarette smoke. Characteristically, clinically significant progressive health improve-
the studies performed by using the liquids in their ments already by week two of continuous use of
original liquid form have found less favorable the device, and no serious adverse events (i.e.
results; however, no comparison with tobacco major depression, abnormal behavior or any event
smoke was performed in any of these studies, and requiring an unscheduled visit to the family prac-
they cannot be considered relevant to EC use titioner or hospitalization) occurred during the
since the samples were not tested in the form con- study. The ASCEND study [Bullen et al. 2013], a
sumed by vapers. More research is needed, three-arm, controlled, randomized, clinical trial
including studies on different cell lines such as designed to compare the efficacy and safety of a
lung epithelial cells. In addition, it is probably first-generation device (with or without nicotine)
necessary to evaluate a huge number of liquids with nicotine patches, reported no serious adverse
with different flavors since a minority of them, in events in any of the three study groups.
an unpredictable manner, appear to raise some
concerns when tested in the aerosol form pro- Few clinical studies have been performed to evalu-
duced by using an EC device. ate the short-term in vivo effects of EC use in cur-
rent or former smokers. Vardavas and colleagues
evaluated the acute effects of using an EC for 5
Clinical studies and research surveys minutes on respiratory function [Vardavas et al.
Clinical trials can be very informative, but they 2012]. Although they did not report the results of
require monitoring of hundreds of users for many commonly-used spirometry parameters, they
years to adequately explore the safety/risk profile found that a sensitive measure of airways resistance
of the products under investigation. Research sur- and nitric oxide levels in exhaled breath were
veys of EC users, on the other hand, can quickly adversely affected. Similar elevations in respiratory
provide information about the potential harm of resistance were reported by other research groups
these products and are much cheaper to run. [Palamidas et al. 2013; Gennimata et al. 2012],
However, self-reported data, highly self-selected who also documented some bizarre elevation in
study populations, and the cross-sectional design exhaled carbon monoxide levels after EC use; this
are some of the most common limitations of finding has been challenged by several other stud-
research surveys. Taken together, findings from ies [Farsalinos et al. 2013f; Nides et al. 2014; Van
surveys and follow-up studies of vapers have Staden et al. 2013]. Schober and colleagues found
shown that EC use is relatively safe. that EC use led to elevated exhaled nitric oxide
[Schober et al. 2013], contradicting the findings
Polosa and colleagues followed up smokers for 24 from Vardavas and colleagues [Vardavas et al.
months, after a 6-month period of intervention 2012]. Characteristically, none of the above studies
during which ECs were given [Polosa et al. 2013a]. performed any comparative tests after smoking
Only mild symptoms such as mouth and throat tobacco cigarettes. Flouris and colleagues found
76 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
that only smoking had an acute adverse effect on lipoid pneumonia. Only oil-based liquids could
respiratory function [Flouris et al. 2013]; no differ- be the cause for this condition; such liquids
ence was observed after the group of smokers was should not be used with ECs.
exposed to active or passive EC use.
One study evaluated the acute effects of tobacco
Two studies have evaluated the short-term effects and EC use on white blood cell count [Flouris
of ECs on the cardiovascular system. Farsalinos et al. 2012]. Smoking one tobacco cigarette
and colleagues evaluated the acute effects of using caused an immediate elevation in white blood
ECs with an 11 mg/ml nicotine-containing liquid cells, neutrophils and lymphocytes, indicating
on hemodynamics and left ventricular function, acute inflammatory distress. On the contrary, no
in comparison with the effects of cigarette smok- differences were observed after using ECs.
ing [Farsalinos et al. 2012]. They found that EC
use resulted in a slight elevation in diastolic blood In conclusion, clinical studies evaluating the
pressure while, after smoking, both systolic and effects of short-term EC use on selected cardio-
diastolic blood pressure and heart rate were sig- vascular and respiratory functional outcomes
nificantly elevated. Obviously, this was due to the have shown that even if some harmful effects of
relatively low nicotine content of the EC (which is vaping are reported, these are considerably milder
considered medium strength). Diastolic dysfunc- compared with smoking conventional cigarettes.
tion was observed in smokers after smoking, However, it is difficult to assess the prognostic
which was in line with findings from previous implications of these studies; longer-term data are
studies. However, no adverse effects were needed before any definite conclusions are made.
observed in EC users after using the device ad lib
for 7 minutes. Another study by the same group
[Farsalinos et al. 2013f], evaluated the acute Passive vaping
effects of EC use on coronary flow. In particular, Passive smoking is an established risk factor for a
they measured the flow velocity reserve of the left variety of diseases [Barnoya and Navas-Acien,
anterior descending coronary artery by echocar- 2013]. Therefore, it is important from a public
diography after intravenous infusion of adeno- health perspective to examine the impact of EC use
sine, representing the maximal ability of the artery on bystanders. Indirect data can be derived from
to deliver blood to the myocardium. Smoking was chemical studies in vapor mentioned above, which
associated with a decline in flow velocity reserve show that the potential of any significant adverse
by 16% and an elevation in resistance to flow by effects on bystanders is minimal. In fact, since side-
19%. On the contrary, no difference was observed stream exposure is nonexistent in EC (aerosol is
in any of these parameters after using the EC. produced only during activation of the device, while
Blood carboxyhemoglobin levels were also meas- tobacco cigarettes emit smoke even when no puffs
ured in participants; baseline values were signifi- are taken), such studies are undoubtedly overesti-
cantly higher in smokers compared with vapers mating the risk of environmental exposure.
and were further elevated after smoking but were
not altered after EC use. Similar observations for Few studies have focused on second-hand vaping.
carboxyhemoglobin levels were observed by Van McAuley and colleagues [McAuley et al. 2012],
Staden and colleagues [Van Staden et al. 2013]. although mentioning indoor air quality in the title
of their study and finding minimal health-related
A clinical case report of a smoker suffering from impact, did not in fact evaluate second-hand vap-
chronic idiopathic neutrophilia was published. ing because aerosol was produced from an EC
According to that report [Farsalinos and device and was evaluated without previously being
Romagna, 2013], switching from smoking to EC inhaled by any user. Moreover, there were some
use led to a reversal of the condition after 6 problems with cross-contamination with tobacco
months. In addition, C-reactive protein levels, cigarette smoke, which made the results somewhat
which were consistently elevated for more than 6 questionable, at least for some of the parameters
years, decreased to normal levels. Another case tested. Schripp and colleagues [Schripp et al.
report of a patient with lipoid pneumonia was 2013] evaluated the emissions from an EC by ask-
published, with the condition attributed to glyc- ing a volunteer to use three different EC devices in
erin-based EC liquids used by the patient a closed 8 m3 chamber. From a selection of 20
[McCauley et al. 2012]. However, glycerin is an chemicals analyzed, only formaldehyde, acrolein,
alcohol (polyol) and thus it is impossible to cause isoprene, acetaldehyde and acetic acid were
http://taw.sagepub.com 77Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
detected. The levels were 5–40 times lower com- use. This is a major limitation, because the levels
pared with emissions from a conventional ciga- of environmental PAHs have significant diurnal
rette. For formaldehyde, the authors specifically and day-to-day variations [Ravindra et al. 2008];
mentioned that the levels were continuously rising therefore, it is highly likely that the differences in
from the time the volunteer entered the room, levels of PAHs (which are mainly products of
even before he started using the EC. Moreover, no combustion and are not expected to be emitted
acute elevation was observed when the smoker from EC use) represented changes due to environ-
used the three EC devices, contrary to the acute mental conditions and not due to EC use.
elevation and spiking of levels when a tobacco cig- Bertholon and colleagues [Bertholon et al. 2013]
arette was lit. The authors concluded that formal- examined the EC aerosol exhaled from a user, in
dehyde was not emitted from the ECs but was due comparison with exhaled smoke from a smoker.
to human contamination, since low amounts of The authors found that particle size diameters
formaldehyde of endogenous origin can be found were 0.29–0.033µm. They observed that the half
in exhaled breath [Riess et al. 2010]. Romagna life of EC aerosol was 11 seconds compared with
and colleagues [Romagna et al. 2012] evaluated 20 minutes for cigarette smoke, indicating that
chemicals released in a realistic setting of a 60 m3 risk of passive vaping exposure is significantly
room, by asking five smokers to smoke ad lib for 5 lower compared with passive smoking.
hours and five vapers to use ECs ad lib for a similar
period of time on two separate days. Nicotine, acr- The recent findings by Czogala and colleagues
olein, toluene, xylene and polycyclic aromatic [Czogala et al. 2013] led to similar conclusions.
hydrocarbons were detected in room air after the The authors compared the emissions of electronic
smoking session, with the amount of total organic and conventional cigarettes generated by experi-
carbon (TOC) reaching to 6.66 mg/m3. In con- enced dual users in a ventilated full-sized room
trast, after the EC session, only glycerol was and found that ECs may emit detectable amounts
detected in minimal levels (72 µg/m3), while TOC of nicotine (depending on the specific EC brand
reached a maximum level of 0.73 mg/m3. tested), but no carbon monoxide and volatile
Characteristically, the amount of TOC accumu- organic carbons. However, the average ambient
lated after 5 hours of EC use was similar to the levels of nicotine of ECs were 10 times lower than
amount found after just 11 minutes of smoking. those of conventional cigarettes (3.32 ± 2.49 ver-
The study on heavy metals mentioned previously sus 31.60 ± 6.91 μg/m3).
[Williams et al. 2013] could also be used to exam-
ine any potential risk of bystanders’ exposure to In his review and comparison with TLVs, Burstyn
toxic metals. The levels of heavy metals found in found that emissions from ECs to the environ-
vapor were minimal, and considering the disper- ment are not expected to pose any measurable
sion of these molecules in the whole room air, it is risk for bystanders [Burstyn, 2014].
unlikely that any of these metals could be present
in measurable quantities in the environment. An issue that needs further clarification relates to
Therefore, the risk for bystanders would be liter- the findings of microparticles emitted from ECs. In
ally nonexistent. Contrary to that, Schober and most studies, these findings are presented in a way
colleagues [Schober et al. 2013] found that levels implying that the risk is similar to environmental or
of aluminum were raised by 2.4 times in a 45 m3 smoking microparticles. In reality, it is not just the
room where volunteers were asked to use ECs for size but the composition of the microparticles that
2 hours. This is a highly unexpected finding which matters. Environmental microparticles are mainly
cannot be supported by the findings of the study carbon, metal, acid and organic microparticles,
by Williams and colleagues [Williams et al. 2013]; many of which result from combustion and are
because the levels found in the latter could not commonly called particulate matter. Particulate
result in such elevation of the environmental levels matter exposure is definitely associated with lung
of aluminum, unless nothing is retained in or and cardiovascular disease [Peters, 2005; Seaton
absorbed from the lungs. Moreover, Schober and et al. 1995]. In the case of ECs, microparticles are
colleagues [Schober et al. 2013] found that levels expected to consist mostly of propylene glycol,
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were glycerol, water and nicotine droplets. Metal and
raised by 20% after EC use. However, a major silica nanoparticles may also be present [Williams
methodological problem of this study is that con- et al. 2013], but, in general, emissions from ECs are
trol environmental measurements were performed incomparable to environmental particulate matter
on a separate day and not on the same day of EC or cigarette smoke microparticles.
78 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Flouris and colleagues [Flouris et al. 2013] per- Considering that first-line oral medications for
formed the only clinical study evaluating the res- nicotine addiction are contraindicated in such
piratory effects of passive vaping compared with patients (prescribing information for bupropion
passive smoking. Researchers found significant and varenicline carry a ‘black-box’ warning for
adverse effects in spirometry parameters after certain psychiatric conditions), ECs may be a
being exposed to passive smoking for 1 hour, promising tool in these challenging patient
while no adverse effects were observed after expo- groups.
sure to passive vaping.
Another subpopulation that may benefit from
Although evaluating the effects of passive vap- regular EC use is that of respiratory patients with
ing requires further work, based on the existing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
evidence from environmental exposure and a progressive disease characterized by a persistent
chemical analyses of vapor, it is safe to conclude inflammatory response to tobacco smoke that
that the effects of EC use on bystanders generally leads to decline in lung function, res-
are minimal compared with conventional piratory failure, cor pulmonale and death.
cigarettes. Consequently, smoking cessation plays a crucial
part in the management of COPD patients.
However, the available evidence in the medical
Miscellaneous safety issues literature indicates that COPD patients who
smoke respond poorly to smoking cessation
Specific subpopulations: psychiatric and efforts [Schiller and Ni, 2006]. To date, no formal
chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder efficacy and safety assessment of EC use in COPD
patients patients has been conducted. There is only evi-
A challenging population subgroup with unique dence from a case report of inveterate smokers
smoking patterns is that of psychiatric patients with COPD and a documented history of recur-
and in particular schizophrenic patients. This ring relapses, who eventually quit tobacco smok-
subpopulation is characterized by a very high ing on their own by using an EC [Caponnetto
smoking prevalence [De Leon and Diaz, 2005] et al. 2011b]. Significant improvement in quality
with an excess of smoking-related mortality of life and reduction in the number of disease
[Brown et al. 2000]. Currently, only NRTs are exacerbations were noted. EC use was well toler-
recommended to treat nicotine dependence in ated with no reported adverse events.
this specific subpopulation, but in general they
are not particularly effective [Aubin et al. 2012].
ECs could be used as an alternative to smoking Accidental nicotine exposure
products in this group. Caponnetto and col- Accidental ingestion of nicotine, especially by
leagues performed a prospective 12-month pilot children, or skin contact with large amounts of
study to evaluate the efficacy of EC use in smok- liquid or highly concentrated nicotine solution
ing reduction and cessation in a group of 14 can be an issue. However, the historically refer-
patients with schizophrenia [Caponnetto et al. enced lethal dose of 60 mg has recently been chal-
2013a]. In 50% of participants, smoking con- lenged in a review by Mayer [Mayer, 2013]; he
sumption went from 30 to 15 cigarettes per day at found that the lethal levels currently reproduced
52 weeks of follow up, while 14.3% managed to in every document originated from dubious
quit smoking. Importantly, no deterioration in experiments performed in the 19th century.
their psychiatric condition was observed, and side Based on post-mortem studies, he suggested that
effects were mild and temporary. The results were the acute dose associated with a lethal outcome
promising although an outdated EC device was would be 500–1000 mg. Taking into account that
used in this study. voluminous vomiting is the first and characteristic
symptom of nicotine ingestion, it seems that far
There is also anecdotal evidence that successful higher levels of nicotine need to be ingested in
smoking cessation could be attained by using an order to have lethal consequences.
EC in smokers with other psychiatric conditions
such as depression [Caponnetto et al. 2011a]. A surveillance system of adverse events has been
Both patients described in this case series stated developed by the FDA, which identifies safety
that EC use was well tolerated and no adverse concerns in relation to tobacco products. Since
events were reported. 2008, 47 adverse events were reported for ECs
http://taw.sagepub.com 79Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
[Chen, 2013]. Eight of them were serious events Administration, 2012]. They account for only 2%
such as hospitalizations for pneumonia, heart fail- of all residential building fires but for 14% of fire
ure, seizures and hypotension and burns. A case deaths. Since ECs are activated only when used
of second-degree burns was caused by a battery by the person and there is no combustion involved,
explosion, which is generally a problem observed there is the potential to avoid the risk of smoking-
in lithium batteries and has occurred in other related fires.
products (such as mobile phones). The author
emphasized that the reported events were not
necessarily associated with EC use but may have Use by youngsters and nonsmokers
been related to pre-existing conditions or other Although beyond the scope of this review, it is
causes. No condition was characteristically asso- important to briefly discuss the potential for addic-
ciated with EC use. tion from EC use. It should be acknowledged that
nicotine is addictive, although recent studies have
A recent review of the California Poison Control shown that several other chemicals present in
System database from 2010 to 2012 identified 35 tobacco are associated with a significant enhance-
cases (14 children) associated with EC exposure ment of the addictiveness of nicotine [Lotfipour
(accidental exposure in 25 cases) [Cantrell, et al. 2011; Rose, 2006; Guillem et al. 2005]. Still,
2013]. A total of five patients were evaluated in an nicotine intake should not be recommended to
emergency department and all were discharged nonsmokers. Smokers are already addicted to nic-
within 4 hours. Nausea, vomiting, dizziness and otine, thus ECs will be a cleaner form of nicotine
oral irritation were most commonly reported. intake, while at the same time they will maintain
Taken together, data from surveillance systems of their sensory stimulation and motor simulation of
adverse events suggest that short-term adverse smoking; these are important aspects of the addic-
effects and accidental exposures to EC cartridges tion to smoking. Regulatory authorities have
are unlikely to result in serious toxicity. expressed concern about EC use by youngsters or
by never-smokers, with ECs becoming a gateway
Notwithstanding, avoiding preventable contact to smoking or becoming a new form of addiction.
with highly concentrated nicotine solution However, such concerns are unsubstantiated;
remains important; this can be achieved by spe- research has shown that EC use by youngsters is
cific labeling of the products, child-proof caps virtually nonexistent unless they are smokers.
and proper education of consumers. There is no Camenga and colleagues [Camenga et al. 2013]
evidence that nicotine-containing EC liquids examined the use of ECs and tobacco in a group of
should be treated in any different way compared adolescents, in a survey conducted in three waves.
with other consumer products used every day in In the first wave of the survey (February 2010),
households (such as bleach, washing machine 1719 adolescents were surveyed from which only
powder, etc.). one nonsmoker was found to be using ECs. In the
second and third wave of the surveys, only five
nonsmoking adolescents were using ECs. In fact,
Electrical accidents and fires these are adolescents who reported first ever use of
The electronic equipment of ECs may be the ECs in the past 30 days; therefore they were not
cause for accidents. ECs are mainly composed of necessarily regular or daily EC consumers. The
lithium batteries. There have been reports of increased prevalence of EC use from 0.9% in 2010
explosions of batteries, caused either by pro- to 2.3% in 2011 concerned smoking adolescents,
longed charging and use of improper chargers or therefore it should be considered a positive finding
by design defects. Similar accidents have occurred that smokers are experimenting with the signifi-
with batteries of other popular devices, such as cantly less harmful ECs. Similarly, the Medicines
mobile phones. Therefore, this does not occur and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
specifically with ECs, however, quality standards (MHRA) found that less than 1% of EC users are
of production should be used in order to avoid never-smokers [MHRA, 2013]. Data from the
such accidents. Centers for Disease Control [2013] National Youth
Tobacco Survey reported doubling in EC experi-
Smoking is a major cause of residential fires. mentation by 13–18 year old students from 1.1%
Between 2008 and 2010, an estimated annual in 2011 to 2.1% in 2012; however, 90.6% of them
average of 7600 smoking-related fires occurred in were smokers. From the whole population, only
residential buildings in the US [US Fire 0.5% were nonsmokers experimenting with ECs.
80 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Once again, participants were asked about ever et al. 2010; Yudkin et al. 2003]. Nonetheless, more
experimenting with an EC in the past 30 days, not research is needed in several areas, such as atom-
regular or daily EC use. Recently, a survey of more izer design and materials to further reduce toxic
than 75,000 students in South Korea was pub- emissions and improve nicotine delivery, and liq-
lished [Lee et al. 2013]. Although they found that uid ingredients to determine the relative risk of
12.6% of them were daily smokers (8.6% were the variety of compounds (mostly flavorings)
using only tobacco cigarettes and 3.6% were using inhaled. Regulations need to be implemented in
both tobacco and ECs), only 0.6% of nonsmokers order to maintain the current situation of minimal
had used ECs in the past 30 days. Although the penetration of EC use in nonsmokers and young-
above mentioned data have been used as argu- sters, while manufacturers should be forced to
ments to support the fact that a new epidemic of provide proof for the quality of the ingredients
nicotine addiction through the use of ECs is used and to perform tests on the efficiency and
appearing, in reality they are showing that any safety of their products. However, any regulatory
experimentation with ECs is done by smokers. decisions should not compromise the variability
This is in fact a positive finding, and could lead to of choices for consumers and should make sure
reduced smoking prevalence through adoption of that ECs are more easily accessible compared
EC use. Therefore, ECs could serve as gateway with their main competitor, the tobacco cigarette.
from smoking; on the contrary, there is no evidence Consumers deserve, and should make, informed
indicating that they could be a gateway to smoking. decisions and research will definitely promote
It is promising to see that penetration of EC use in this. In particular, current data on safety evalua-
youngsters is virtually nonexistent, especially when tion and risk assessment of ECs is sufficient
you take into consideration that there is currently enough to avert restrictive regulatory measures as
no official regulation in most countries to prohibit a consequence of an irrational application of the
the access to ECs by youngsters. precautionary principle [Saitta et al. 2014].
ECs are a revolutionary product in tobacco harm
Conclusion reduction. Although they emit vapor, which
Existing evidence indicates that EC use is by far a resembles smoke, there is literally no fire (com-
less harmful alternative to smoking. There is no bustion) and no ‘fire’ (suspicion or evidence that
tobacco and no combustion involved in EC use; they may be the cause for disease in a similar way
therefore, regular vapers may avoid several harm- to tobacco cigarettes). Due to their unique char-
ful toxic chemicals that are typically present in the acteristics, ECs represent a historical opportu-
smoke of tobacco cigarettes. Indeed, some toxic nity to save millions of lives and significantly
chemicals are released in the EC vapor as well, reduce the burden of smoking-related diseases
but their levels are substantially lower compared worldwide.
with tobacco smoke, and in some cases (such as
nitrosamines) are comparable with the amounts Funding
found in pharmaceutical nicotine products. This research received no specific grant from any
Surveys, clinical, chemistry and toxicology data funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-
have often been mispresented or misinterpreted for-profit sectors.
by health authorities and tobacco regulators, in
such a way that the potential for harmful conse- Conflict of interest statement
quences of EC use has been largely exaggerated Riccardo Polosa is a Professor of Medicine and is
[Polosa and Caponnetto, 2013]. It is obvious that supported by the University of Catania, Italy. He
some residual risk associated with EC use may be has received lecture fees and research funding
present, but this is probably trivial compared with from GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer, manufacturers
the devastating consequences of smoking. of stop smoking medications. He has also served as
Moreover, ECs are recommended to smokers or a consultant for Pfizer and Arbi Group Srl (Milano,
former smokers only, as a substitute for conven- Italy), the distributor of Categoria™ e-Cigarettes.
tional cigarettes or to prevent smoking relapse; His research on electronic cigarettes is currently
thus, any risk should be estimated relative to the supported by LIAF (Lega Italiana AntiFumo).
risk of continuing or relapsing back to smoking
and the low efficacy of currently approved medi- Konstantinos Farsalinos is a researcher at Onassis
cations for smoking cessation should be taken Cardiac Surgery Center. He has never been
into consideration [Moore et al. 2009; Rigotti funded by the pharmaceutical or the tobacco
http://taw.sagepub.com 81Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
industry. For some of his studies, the institution Comparison of the aerosol produced by electronic
has received financial compensation from elec- cigarettes with conventional cigarettes and the shisha.
tronic cigarette companies for the studies’ cost. Rev Mal Respir 30: 752–757.
His salary is currently being paid by a scholarship
Brown, S., Inskip, H. and Barraclough, B. (2000)
grant from the Hellenic Society of Cardiology. Causes of the excess mortality of schizophrenia. Br J
Psychiatry 177: 212–217
Bullen, C., Howe, C., Laugesen, M., McRobbie,
H., Parag, V., Williman, J. et al. (2013) Electronic
References cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 382: 1629–1637.
Adkison, S., O’Connor, R., Bansal-Travers, M.,
Hyland, A., Borland, R., Yong, H.H. et al. (2013)
Burstyn, I. (2014) Peering through the mist:
Electronic nicotine delivery systems: international
Systematic review of what the chemistry of
tobacco control four-country survey. Am J Prev Med
contaminants in electronic cigarettes tells us about
44: 207–215.
health risks. BMC Public Health 14: 18.
Ambrose, J. and Barua, R. (2004) The
Cahn, Z. and Siegel, M. (2011) Electronic cigarettes
pathophysiology of cigarette smoking and
as a harm reduction strategy for tobacco control: a
cardiovascular disease: an update. J Am Coll Cardiol
step forward or a repeat of past mistakes? J Public
43: 1731–1737.
Health Policy 32: 16–31.
American Chemistry Council (2003) Ethylene
Camenga, D., Delmerico, J., Kong, G., Cavallo, D.,
Glycols: Considerations Against Use in Theatrical
Hyland, A., Cummings, K. et al. (2013) Trends in
Fogs/Mist and Artificial Smoke. Available at: http://
use of electronic nicotine delivery systems by
www.americanchemistry.com/ProductsTechnology/
adolescents. Addict Behav 39(1): 338–340.
Ethylene-Glycols-2/PDF-Ethylene-Glycols-Fog-
Information-Sheet.pdf (Accessed: 20 November Cantrell, F. (2013) Adverse effects of e-cigarette
2013). exposures. J Community Health 15 December 2013
(Epub ahead of print). DOI: 10.1007/s10900-013-
Antal, M., Mok, W., Roy, J. and T-Raissi, A. (1985)
9807-5
Pyrolytic sources of hydrocarbons from biomass. J
Anal Appl Pyrol 8: 291–303. Caponnetto, P., Auditore, R., Russo, C., Cappello,
G. and Polosa, R. (2013a) Impact of an electronic
Aubin, H., Rollema, H., Svensson, T. and Winterer, G.
cigarette on smoking reduction and cessation
(2012) Smoking, quitting, and psychiatric disease: A
in schizophrenic smokers: a prospective 12-month
review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 36: 271–284.
pilot study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 10:
Bahl, V., Lin, S., Xu, N., Davis, B., Wang, Y. and 446–461.
Talbot, P. (2012) Comparison of electronic cigarette
refill fluid cytotoxicity using embryonic and adult Caponnetto, P., Campagna, D., Cibella, F., Morjaria,
models. Reprod Toxicol 34: 529–537. J., Caruso, M., Russo, C. et al. (2013b) EffiCiency
and Safety of an eLectronic cigAreTte (ECLAT) as
Barnoya, J. and Navas-Acien, A. (2013) Protecting tobacco cigarettes substitute: a prospective 12-month
the world from secondhand tobacco smoke exposure: randomized control design study. PLoS One 8:
where do we stand and where do we go from here? e66317.
Nicotine Tob Res 15: 789–804.
Caponnetto, P., Polosa, R., Auditore, R., Russo, C.
Behar, R., Davis, B., Wang, Y., Bahl, V., Lin, S. and
and Campagna, D. (2011a) Smoking cessation with
Talbot, P. (2014) Identification of toxicants in
e-cigarettes in smokers with a documented history of
cinnamon-flavored electronic cigarette refill fluids.
depression and recurring relapses. Int J Clin Med 2:
Toxicol In Vitro 28: 198–208.
281–284.
Benowitz, N. and Gourlay, S. (1997) Cardiovascular
Caponnetto, P., Polosa, R., Russo, C., Leotta, C.
toxicity of nicotine: implications for nicotine
and Campagna, D. (2011b) Successful smoking
replacement therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 29: 1422–
cessation with electronic cigarettes in smokers with
1431.
a documented history of recurring relapses: a case
Benowitz, N., Zevin, S. and Jacob, P. III (1998) series. J Med Case Rep 5: 585.
Suppression of nicotine intake during ad libitum
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
cigarette smoking by high-dose transdermal nicotine.
(2013) Notes from the field: electronic cigarette use
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 287: 958–962.
among middle and high school students - United
Bertholon, J., Becquemin, M., Roy, M., Roy, States, 2011-2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 62:
F., Ledur, D., Annesi Maesano, I. et al. (2013) 729–730.
82 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
Chen, I. (2013) FDA summary of adverse events on smoking cessation with the use of electronic
electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res 15: 615–616. cigarette: a case report. Clin Med Insights Case Rep 6:
15–21.
Czekaj, P., Pałasz, A., Lebda-Wyborny, T., Nowaczyk-
Dura, G., Karczewska, W., Florek, E. et al. (2002) Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G., Allifranchini, E.,
Morphological changes in lungs, placenta, liver and Ripamonti, E., Bocchietto, E., Todeschi, S. et al.
kidneys of pregnant rats exposed to cigarette smoke. (2013a) Comparison of the cytotoxic potential of
Int Arch Occup Environ Health 75 (Suppl): S27–S35. cigarette smoke and electronic cigarette vapour extract
on cultured myocardial cells. Int J Environ Res Public
Czogala, J., Goniewicz, M., Fidelus, B., Zielinska-
Health 10: 5146–5162.
Danch, W., Travers, M. and Sobczak, A. (2013)
Secondhand exposure to vapors from electronic Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G., Tsiapras, D.,
cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res (11 December 2011 (Epub Kyrzopoulos, S. and Voudris, V. (2013b) Evaluating
ahead of print). DOI: 10.1093/ntr/ntt203 nicotine levels selection and patterns of electronic
cigarette use in a group of “vapers” who had achieved
Dawkins, L. (2013) Electronic cigarettes: what are they
complete substitution of smoking. Subst Abuse 7:
and are they effective? E-Cigarette Summit, London,
139–146.
UK (oral presentation). Available at: http://e-cigarette-
summit.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Summit- Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G., Tsiapras, D.,
Presentations.pdf [accessed 22 December 2013]. Kyrzopoulos, S. and Voudris, V. (2013c) Evaluation
of electronic cigarette use (vaping) topography and
Dawkins, L. and Corcoran, O. (2013) Acute electronic
estimation of liquid consumption: implications for
cigarette use: nicotine delivery and subjective effects in
research protocol standards definition and for public
regular users. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 231: 401–407.
health authorities’ regulation. Int J Environ Res Public
Dawkins, L., Turnern, J., Roberts, A. and Soar, K. (2013) Health 10: 2500–2514.
‘Vaping’ profiles and preferences: an online survey of
Farsalinos, K., Romagna, G. and Voudris, V. (2013d)
electronic cigarette users. Addiction 108: 1115–1125.
Authors miss the opportunity to discuss important
De Leon, J. and Diaz, F. (2005). A meta-analysis public health implications. J Chromatogr A 1312:
of worldwide studies demonstrates an association 155–156.
between schizophrenia and tobacco smoking
behaviors. Schizophr Res 76: 1351–1357. Farsalinos, K., Spyrou, A., Tsimopoulou, K.,
Stefopoulos, C., Romagna, G. and Voudris, V.
Dockrell, M., Morison, R., Bauld, L. and McNeill, A. (2014). Nicotine absorption from electronic cigarette
(2013) E-Cigarettes: prevalence and attitudes in Great use: comparison between first and new-generation
Britain. Nicotine Tob Res 15: 1737–1744. devices. Sci Rep (in press).
Douptcheva, N., Gmel, G., Studer, J., Deline, S. and
Farsalinos, K., Tsiapras, D., Kyrzopoulos, S.,
Etter, J.F. (2013) Use of electronic cigarettes among
Savvopoulou, M., Avramidou, E., Vasilopoulou, D.
young Swiss men. J Epidemiol Community Health 67:
et al. (2012) Acute effects of using an electronic
1075–1076.
nicotine-delivery device (e-cigarette) on myocardial
Environmental Protection Agency (1992) EPA function: comparison with the effects of regular
Report/600/6-90/006F. Respiratory health effects of cigarettes. Eur Heart J 33(Abstract Supplement): 203.
passive smoking: lung cancer and other disorders.
Farsalinos, K., Tsiapras, D., Kyrzopoulos, S.,
Washington, DC. Available at: http://oaspub.epa.
Stefopoulos, C., Spyrou, A., Tsakalou, M. et al.
gov/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=36793
(2013f) Immediate effects of electronic cigarette use
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).
on coronary circulation and blood carboxyhemoglobin
Environmental Protection Agency (2000) levels: comparison with cigarette smoking. Eur Heart J
Cinnamaldehyde (040506) fact sheet. Available 34(Abstract Supplement): 13.
at: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/
Flouris, A., Chorti, M., Poulianiti, K., Jamurtas,
reg_actions/registration/fs_PC-040506_1-Oct-98.pdf
A., Kostikas, K., Tzatzarakis, M. et al. (2013) Acute
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).
impact of active and passive electronic cigarette
Etter, J. and Bullen, C. (2011) Electronic cigarette: smoking on serum cotinine and lung function. Inhal
users profile, utilization, satisfaction and perceived Toxicol 25: 91–101.
efficacy. Addiction 106: 2017–2028.
Flouris, A., Poulianiti, K., Chorti, M., Jamurtas, A.,
Etter, J., Zäther, E. and Svensson, S. (2013) Analysis Kouretas, D., Owolabi, E. et al. (2012) Acute effects of
of refill liquids for electronic cigarettes. Addiction 108: electronic and tobacco cigarette smoking on complete
1671–1679. blood count. Food Chem Toxicol 50: 3600–3603.
Farsalinos, K. and Romagna, G. (2013) Chronic Food and Drug Administration (2009) FDA and
idiopathic neutrophilia in a smoker, relieved after Public health experts warn about electronic cigarettes.
http://taw.sagepub.com 83Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/ Laugesen, M. (2008) Safety Report on the
Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm173222.htm Ruyan® e-cigarette Cartridge and Inhaled
(Accessed: 20 November 2013). Aerosol. Available at: http://www.healthnz.co.nz/
RuyanCartridgeReport30-Oct-08.pdf (Accessed: 18
Gennimata, S., Palamidas, A., Kaltsakas, G., Tsikrika,
November 2013).
S., Vakali, S., Gratziou, C. et al. (2012) Acute effect of
e-cigarette on pulmonary function in healthy subjects Laugesen, M. (2009). Ruyan®E-cigarette Bench-top
and smokers. Presented at the European Respiratory tests. Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco
Society’s Annual Congress, Poster P1053. Available (SRNT) Dublin, Poster 5-11. Available at: http://
at: https://www.ersnetsecure.org/public/prg_congres. www.healthnz.co.nz/DublinEcigBenchtopHandout.
abstract?ww_i_presentation=59718 (Accessed: 20 pdf [accessed 20 November 2013].
November 2013).
Le Houezec, J., McNeill, A. and Britton, J. (2011)
Goniewicz, M., Knysak, J., Gawron, M., Kosmider, Tobacco, nicotine and harm reduction. Drug Alcohol
L., Sobczak, A., Kurek, J. et al. (2013) Levels of Rev 30: 119–123.
selected carcinogens and toxicants in vapour from
Lee, S., Grana, R. and Glantz, S. (2013) Electronic
electronic cigarettes. Tob Control. DOI: 10.1136/
cigarette use among Korean adolescents: a cross-
tobaccocontrol-2012-050859. (Published online: 6
sectional study of market penetration, dual use,
March 2013).
and relationship to quit attempts and former
Greenland, S., Satterfield, M. and Lanes, S. (1998) A smoking. J Adolesc Health. DOI: 10.1016/j.
meta-analysis to assess the incidence of adverse effects jadohealth.2013.11.003. (Published online: 22
associated with the transdermal nicotine patch. Drug November 2013).
Safety 18: 297–308.
Lotfipour, S., Arnold, M., Hogenkamp, D., Gee, K.,
Guillem, K., Vouillac, C., Azar, M., Parsons, L., Koob, Belluzzi, J. and Leslie, F. (2011) The monoamine
G., Cador, M. et al. (2005) Monoamine oxidase oxidase (MAO) inhibitor tranylcypromine enhances
inhibition dramatically increases the motivation to nicotine self-administration in rats through a
self-administer nicotine in rats. J Neurosci 25: mechanism independent of MAO inhibition.
8593–8600. Neuropharmacology 61: 95–104.
Lúdvíksdóttir, D., Blöndal, T., Franzon, M.,
Guslandi, M. (1999) Nicotine treatment for ulcerative
Gudmundsson, T. and Säwe, U. (1999) Effects of nicotine
colitis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 48: 481–484.
nasal spray on atherogenic and thrombogenic factors
Hadwiger, M., Trehy, M., Ye, W., Moore, T., Allgire, during smoking cessation. J Intern Med 246: 61–66.
J. and Westenberger, B. (2010) Identification of
Mayer, B. (2013). How much nicotine kills a human?
amino-tadalafil and rimonabant in electronic
Tracing back the generally accepted lethal dose to
cigarette products using high pressure liquid
dubious self-experiments in the nineteenth century.
chromatography with diode array and tandem mass
Arch Toxicol 88: 5–7.
spectrometric detection. J Chromatogr A 1217:
7547–7555. Mayers, M. (2009) FDA acts to protect public
health from electronic cigarettes. Campaign for
Hajek, P., Jarvis, M., Belcher, M., Sutherland, G. and
Tobacco-Free Kids statement. Available at: http://
Feyerabend, C. (1989) Effect of smoke-free cigarettes
www.tobaccofreekids.org/press_releases/post/id_1166
on 24 h cigarette withdrawal: a double-blind placebo-
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).
controlled study. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 97:
99–102. McAuley, T., Hopke, P., Zhao, J. and Babaian, S.
(2012) Comparison of the effects of e-cigarette vapor
Hubbard, R., Lewis, S., Smith, C., Godfrey, C.,
and cigarette smoke on indoor air quality. Inhal Toxicol
Smeeth, L., Farrington, P. et al. (2005) Use of
24: 850–857.
nicotine replacement therapy and the risk of acute
myocardial infarction, stroke, and death. Tob Control McCauley, L., Markin, C. and Hosmer, D. (2012) An
14: 416–421. unexpected consequence of electronic cigarette use.
Chest 141(4): 1110–1113.
Kim, H. and Shin, H. (2013) Determination of
tobacco-specific nitrosamines in replacement liquids McClernon, F., Hiott, F., Westman, E., Rose, J. and
of electronic cigarettes by liquid chromatography- Levin, E. (2006) Transdermal nicotine attenuates
tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 1291: depression symptoms in nonsmokers: a double-blind,
48–55. placebo-controlled trial. Psychopharmacology (Berl)
189: 125–133.
King, B., Alam, S., Promoff, G., Arrazola, R. and
Dube, S. (2013) Awareness and ever use of electronic MHRA Commission on human medicines, Working
cigarettes among US adults, 2010–2011. Nicotine Tob Group on nicotine containing products (NCPS)
Res 15(9): 1623–1627. (2013). Current use of electronic cigarettes. Available
84 http://taw.sagepub.comKE Farsalinos and R Polosa
at: http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/comms-ic/ on smoking reduction and cessation: a prospective
documents/websiteresources/con286845.pdf 6-month pilot study. BMC Public Health 11: 786.
(Accessed: 20 November 2013).
Polosa, R., Morjaria, J., Caponnetto, P., Campagna,
Moore, D., Aveyard, P., Connock, M., Wang, D., D., Russo, C., Alamo, A. et al. (2013a) Effectiveness
Fry-Smith, A. and Barton, P. (2009) Effectiveness and and tolerability of electronic cigarette in real-life: a
safety of nicotine replacement therapy 24-month prospective observational study. Intern
assisted reduction to stop smoking: systematic Emerg Med. DOI: 10.1007/s11739-013-0977-z
review and meta-analysis. BMJ 338: b1024. (Published online: July 2013).
Murray, R., Bailey, W., Daniels, K., Bjornson, W., Polosa, R., Rodu, B., Caponnetto, P., Maglia, M.
Kurnow, K., Connett, J. et al. (1996) Safety of and Raciti, C. (2013b) A fresh look at tobacco harm
nicotine polacrilex gum used by 3,094 participants in reduction: the case for the electronic cigarette. Harm
the Lung Health Study. Lung Health Study Research Reduct J 10: 19.
Group. Chest 109: 438–445.
Pryor, W. and Stone, K. (1993) Oxidants in cigarette
National Association of Attorneys General (2013) smoke: radicals, hydrogen peroxide, peroxynitrate, and
FDA regulation on E-cigarettes. Available at: http:// peroxynitrite. Ann NY Acad Sci 686: 12–28.
www.naag.org/assets/files/pdf/E%20Cigarette%20
Ravindra, K., Wauters, E. and Van Grieken, R. (2008)
Final%20Letter%20(5)(1).pdf (Accessed: 20
Variation in particulate PAHs levels and their relation
November 2013).
with the transboundary movement of the air masses.
Nides, M., Leischow, S., Bhatter, M. and Simmons, Sci Total Environ 396: 100–110.
M. (2014) Nicotine blood levels and short-term
Renne, R., Wehner, A., Greenspan, B., Deford, H.,
smoking reduction with an electronic nicotine delivery
Ragan, H., Westenberg, R. et al. (1992) 2-Week and
system. Am J Health Behav 38: 265–274.
13-Week Inhalation Studies of Aerosolized Glycerol in
Nielsen, S., Franklin, G., Longstreth, W., Swanson, Rats. Inhal Toxicol 4: 95–111.
P. and Checkoway, H. (2013) Nicotine from edible
Riess, U., Tegtbur, U., Fauck, C., Fuhrmann,
Solanaceae and risk of Parkinson disease. Ann Neurol
F., Markewitz, D. and Salthammer, T. (2010)
74: 472–477.
Experimental setup and analytical methods for
Nitenberg, A. and Antony, I. (1999) Effects of nicotine the non-invasive determination of volatile organic
gum on coronary vasomotor responses compounds, formaldehyde and NOx in exhaled
during sympathetic stimulation in patients with human breath. Anal Chim Acta 669: 53–62.
coronary artery stenosis. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 34:
Rigotti, N., Pipe, A., Benowitz, N., Arteaga, C.,
694–699.
Garza, D. and Tonstad, S. (2010) Efficacy and safety
Palamidas, A., Gennimata, S., Kaltsakas, G., Tsikrika, of varenicline for smoking cessation in patients with
S., Vakali, S., Gratziou, C. et al. (2013) Acute effect cardiovascular disease: A randomized trial. Circulation
of an e-cigarette with and without nicotine on lung 121: 221–229.
function. Presented at the European Respiratory
Robertson, O., Loosli, C., Puck, T., Wise, H., Lemon,
Society’s Annual Congress, Poster P1054. Available
H. and Lester, W. Jr (1947) Tests for the chronic
at: http://www.ersnet.org/learning_resources_player/
toxicity of propylene glycol and triethylene glycol
abstract_print_13/files/100.pdf (Accessed: 20
on monkeys and rats by vapor inhalation and oral
November 2013).
administration. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 91: 52–76.
Pellegrino, R., Tinghino, B., Mangiaracina, G.,
Rodu, B. and Godshall, W. (2006) Tobacco harm
Marani, A., Vitali, M., Protano, C. et al. (2012)
reduction: An alternative cessation strategy for
Electronic cigarettes: an evaluation of exposure to
inveterate smokers. Harm Reduct J 3: 37.
chemicals and fine particulate matter (PM). Ann Ig
24: 279–288.
Romagna, G., Allifranchini, E., Bocchietto, E.,
Todeschi, S., Esposito, M. and Farsalinos, K. (2013)
Peters, A. (2005) Particulate matter and heart disease:
Cytotoxicity evaluation of electronic cigarette
evidence from epidemiological studies. Toxicol Appl
vapor extract on cultured mammalian fibroblasts
Pharmacol 207: 477–482.
(ClearStream-LIFE): comparison with tobacco
Polosa, R. and Caponnetto, P. (2013) Time for cigarette smoke extract. Inhal Toxicol 25: 354–361.
evidence-based e-cigarette regulation. Lancet Oncol 14:
Romagna, G., Zabarini, L., Barbiero, L.,
582–583.
Bocchietto, E., Todeschi, S., Caravati, E. et al.
Polosa, R., Caponnetto, P., Morjaria, J., Papale, (2012) Characterization of chemicals released
G., Campagna, D. and Russo, C. (2011) Effect of to the environment by electronic cigarettes use
an electronic nicotine delivery device (e-Cigarette) (ClearStream-Air project): is passive vaping a reality?
http://taw.sagepub.com 85Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety 5(2)
SRNT Europe Annual Congress, Helsinki, Finland. Carboxyhaemoglobin levels, health and lifestyle
Poster RRP18. Available at: http://www.srnteurope. perceptions in smokers converting from tobacco
org/assets/srnt-e2012abstractbook.pdf [accessed 20 cigarettes to electronic cigarettes. S Afr Med J 103:
November 2013]. 865–868.
Rose, J. (2006) Nicotine and nonnicotine factors in Vardavas, C., Anagnostopoulos, N., Kougias, M.,
cigarette addiction. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 184: Evangelopoulou, V., Connolly, G. and Behrakis,
274–285. P. (2012) Short-term pulmonary effects of using
an electronic cigarette: impact on respiratory flow
Rose, J. and Levin, E. (1991) Inter-relationships
resistance, impedance, and exhaled nitric oxide. Chest
between conditioned and primary reinforcement in
141: 1400–1406.
the maintenance of cigarette smoking. Br J Addict 86:
605–609. Varughese, S., Teschke, K., Brauer, M., Chow, Y.,
van Netten, C. and Kennedy, S. (2005) Effects of
Russell, M. (1991) The future of nicotine replacement.
theatrical smokes and fogs on respiratory health in the
Br J Addict 86: 653–658.
entertainment industry. Am J Ind Med 47: 411–418.
Sahakian, B., Jones, G., Levy, R., Gray, J. and
Werley, M., McDonald, P., Lilly, P., Kirkpatrick, D.,
Warburton, D.(1989) The effects of nicotine on
Wallery, J., Byron, P. et al. (2011) Non-clinical safety
attention, information processing, and short-term
and pharmacokinetic evaluations of propylene glycol
memory in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer
aerosol in Sprague-Dawley rats and Beagle dogs.
type. Br J Psychiatry 154: 797–800.
Toxicology 287: 76–90.
Saitta, D., Ferro, G. and Polosa, R. (2014) Achieving
Westenberger, B. (2009) Evaluation of e-Cigarettes.
appropriate regulations for electronic cigarettes. Ther
St.Louis, MO: Department of Health and Human
Adv Chronic Dis 3 February 2014 (Epub ahead of
Services, Food and Drug Administration, Center
print). DOI: 10.1177/2040622314521271
for Drug Evaluation and Research, Division of
Schiller, J. and Ni, H. (2006) Cigarette smoking Pharmaceutical Analysis. Available at: http://www.fda.
and smoking cessation among persons with chronic gov/downloads/drugs/Scienceresearch/UCM173250.
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Health Promot pdf (Accessed: November 10, 2013).
20: 319–323.
WHO-IARC (2004) IARC monographs on the
Schober, W., Szendrei, K., Matzen, W., Osiander- evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Volume
Fuchs, H., Heitmann, D., Schettgen, T. et al. (2013) 83, tobacco smoke and involuntary smoking. Available
Use of electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) impairs at: http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol83/
indoor air quality and increases FeNO levels of mono83.pdf. (Accessed: 20 November 2013).
e-cigarette consumers. Int J Hyg Environ Health. DOI:
Wieslander, G., Norbäck, D. and Lindgren, T. (2001)
10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.11.003. (Published online: 6
Experimental exposure to propylene glycol mist
December 2013).
in aviation emergency training: acute ocular and
Schripp, T., Markewitz, D., Uhde, E. and Salthammer, respiratory effects. Occup Environ Med 58: 649–655.
T. (2013) Does e-cigarette consumption cause passive
Williams, M., Villarreal, A., Bozhilov, K., Lin, S. and
vaping? Indoor Air 23: 25–31.
Talbot, P. (2013) Metal and silicate particles including
Seaton, A., MacNee, W., Donaldson, K. and Godden, nanoparticles are present in electronic cigarette
D. (1995) Particulate air pollution and acute health cartomizer fluid and aerosol. PLoS One 8: e57987.
effects. Lancet 345: 176-178.
World Health Organization (2013) Tobacco fact sheet
Stein, Y., Antal, M. and Jones, M. (1983) A study of No 339. Updated July 2013. Available at: http://www.
the gas-phase pyrolysis of glycerol. J Anal Appl Pyrol 4: who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs339/en/ (Accessed:
283–296. 18 November 2013).
US Fire Administration (2012) Smoking-related Fires Woolf, K., Zabad, M., Post, J., McNitt, S., Williams,
in residential buildings (2008-2010). Topical Fire G. and Bisognano, J. (2012) Effect of nicotine
Report Series 13. Available at: http://www.usfa.fema. replacement therapy on cardiovascular outcomes after
gov/downloads/pdf/statistics/v13i6.pdf (Accessed: 20 acute coronary syndromes. Am J Cardiol 110: 968–970.
November 2013).
Yudkin, P., Hey, K., Roberts, S., Welch, S., Murphy,
US Pharmacopeia (2013) Elemental impurities limits. M. and Walton, R. (2003) Abstinence from smoking
Available at: http://www.usp.org/sites/default/files/usp_ eight years after participation in randomised
pdf/EN/USPNF/key-issues/c232_final.pdf (Accessed: controlled trial of nicotine patch. BMJ 327: 28–29.
20 November 2013).
Visit SAGE journals online Zevin, S., Benowitz, N. and Jacob, P. (1998) Dose-
http://taw.sagepub.com Van Staden, S., Groenewald, M., Engelbrecht, related cardiovascular and endocrine effects of
SAGE journals R., Becker, P. and Hazelhurst, L. (2013) transdermal nicotine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 64: 87–95.
86 http://taw.sagepub.com